The occurrence and levels of activity of various enzymes of carbohydrate catabolism in culture forms (promastigotes) of 4 human species of Leishmania (L. brasiliensis, L. donovani, L. mexicana, and L. tropica) were compared. These organisms possess enzymes of the Embden-Meyerhof pathway but lack lactate dehydrogenase. No evidence could be found for the production of lactic acid by growing cultures and lactic acid could not be detected either in cell-free preparations or after incubation of cell-free extracts with pyruvate and NADH under appropriate conditions. All 4 species possess alpha-glycerophosphate dehydrogenase and alpha-glycerophosphate phosphatase which together could regenerate NAD, thus compensating for the absence of lactate dehydrogenase. The oxidative and nonoxidative reactions of the hexose monophosphate pathway are present in all 4 species. Cell-free extracts have pyruvate dehydrogenase activity which allows the entry of pyruvate into and its subsequent oxidation through the tricarboxylic acid cycle. All enzymes of this cycle, including a thiamine pyrophosphate dependent alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase, are present. Both NAD and NADP-linked malate dehydrogenase activities are present. The isocitrate dehydrogenase is NADP specific. There is an active glutamate dehydrogenase which could compete with alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase for the common substrate (alpha-ketoglutarate). Replenishment of C4 acids is accomplished by heterotrophic CO2 fixation catalyzed by pyruvate carboxylase. All 4 species have high levels of NADH oxidase activity. Several enzymes thus far not found in any species of Leishmania have been demonstrated. These are: phosphoglucose isomerase, triose phosphate isomerase, fructose-1, 6-diphosphatase, 3-phosphoglycerate kinase, enolase, alpha-glycerophosphate dehydrogenase, alpha-glycerophosphate phosphatase, pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, citrate synthase, aconitase, alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase, glutamate dehydrogenase, and NADH oxidase.