The effects of dietary soybean phospholipid, its hydrogenation product and safflower phospholipid on gene expression and the activity of hepatic enzymes in fatty acid biosynthesis were examined in fasted-refed rats. Phospholipid composition of soybean phospholipid and its hydrogenation product were the same, but the hydrogenation product contained negligible amounts of unsaturated fatty acids. Among phospholipid classes, lysophosphatidylcholine and phosphatidylinositol proportions were slightly higher in safflower phospholipid than in soybean phospholipid or its hydrogenation product. Rats were fasted for 2 d and refed a fat-free diet or a diet containing 4% fatty acids either as soybean oil or various phospholipid preparations for 3 d. Compared to the fat-free diet, the soybean oil diet only slightly decreased specific, but not total hepatic fatty acid synthetase and malic enzyme activity, and it was totally ineffective in modulating glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase and pyruvate kinase activity under our experimental conditions. The diets containing phospholipids, however, markedly decreased the activity of these enzymes. The extent of reduction was somewhat attenuated with hydrogenated soybean phospholipid as compared with soybean and safflower phospholipids. Dot and Northern blot hybridization using specific cDNA probes showed that, compared to a fat-free diet, diets containing phospholipids profoundly decreased the hepatic mRNA levels of enzymes in fatty acid synthesis. Soybean oil, however, only marginally affected these parameters. Hepatic mRNA levels for enzymes correlated well with enzyme activity. Dietary phospholipids therefore appear to have decreased enzyme activity in fatty acid synthesis primarily by suppressing the mRNA levels of these enzymes. Compared to soybean oil, hydrogenated soybean phospholipid is still effective in decreasing the activity and mRNA level of enzymes in fatty acid synthesis. Therefore, it is difficult to ascribe the potent physiological activity of phospholipid in reducing fatty acid synthesis entirely to polyunsaturated fatty acid moiety.