Though feedforward activation (FA) is a little known principle of control in metabolic networks, there is one well-known example; namely, the activation of pyruvate kinase (PK) by fructose-1,6-biphosphate (FBP) in glycolysis. The effects of this activation on the enzyme's kinetics are well characterised, but its possible role in glycolytic control has not been determined, and, experimentally, there is as yet no direct way of modifying the enzyme to remove just the FBP activation without affecting other aspects of the enzyme's kinetics. Given this limitation, we used a detailed numerical simulation of human erythrocyte glycolysis to simulate the effects of selective removal of the activation of PK by FBP on steady-state metabolite concentrations and on the dynamic response of glycolytic flux to a sudden increase of the cell's demand for ATP. Our modelling results predict that in the absence of FA steady-state levels of metabolites within the activation loop, i.e. from FBP to phosphoenolpyruvate, would be four- to thirteen-fold higher than normal, whereas levels of ATP and metabolites outside the loop, i.e. glucose-6-phosphate, fructose-6-phosphate and pyruvate, would be lower than normal. Existing clinical evidence in a patient with haemolytic anaemia, correlated with a lack of activation of PK by FBP (Paglia D.E., Valentine W.N., Holbrook C.T., Brockway R., Blood (1983) 62 972-979), is consistent with this prediction. In response to changing demand for ATP, the model predicts that the corresponding change of glycolytic flux would entail changes of metabolite concentrations in the absence of FA, but that in its presence the levels of metabolites within the activation loop remain essentially unperturbed. Thus, our results suggest that by stabilising metabolite pools in the face of variable glycolytic flux, FA may serve to avoid perturbations of the oxygen affinity of haemoglobin (sensitive to the levels of 2,3-phosphoglycerate) and of cell osmolality that would otherwise occur during variations in the cell's demand for ATP. In addition, by significantly raising the steady-state setpoint of intermediate metabolite pools, the productivity index (ratio of glycolytic flux to total metabolites in the pathway) of glycolysis would fall almost four-fold in the absence of forward activation.