Arginine (Arg), injected intraperitoneally into rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss), increases plasma concentrations of glucagon, glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), and insulin by three- to 10-fold. Resulting ratios of glucagon and GLP-1 over insulin are unchanged in 20-d food-deprived fish (saline, 1.28 vs. Arg, 0.93; not significant) while slightly increased in feeding trout (saline, 0.70 vs. Arg, 0.92; P<0.05). In food-deprived juveniles, Arg injection leads to significant decreases in plasma fatty acids (saline, 1.65 mM L(-1) vs. Arg, 1.09 mM L(-1); P<0.05) and increases in glycogen phosphorylase total activity (saline, 3.7 units g(-1) vs. Arg, 4.6 units g(-1); P<0.05) and degree of phosphorylation (saline, 1.7 units g(-1) vs. Arg, 2.33 units g(-1); P<0.05). Plasma and liver glucose and liver enzymes (glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase, pyruvate kinase, phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase, lactate dehydrogenase, and malic enzyme) are unaffected. Otherwise, fish show the changes in plasma metabolites expected with food deprivation. Arg injection into feeding fish results in decreases in plasma fatty acids, liver glycogen, and glucose, while liver glucose 6-phosphate concentrations increase. Hepatocytes isolated from feeding fish injected with Arg 2 h previously show significantly lower rates of lactate oxidation than controls (85% of control), while rates of gluconeogenesis and hormonal responses to mammalian glucagon and GLP-1 remain unchanged. Rates of lactate oxidation and gluconeogenesis are significantly decreased by 5%-10% on treatment with porcine insulin. Complete immunoneutralization of insulin with rabbit antisalmon insulin serum decreases hepatic glucose 6-phosphate concentrations and abolishes the Arg-dependent effects on glycogen phosphorylase. It appears that short-term increases in pancreatic hormones cause only minor metabolic readjustments in the relatively short time frame covered in these experiments. Surprisingly, complete removal of insulin does not have immediate altering or detrimental effects on key metabolites and metabolic pathways, even if glucagon and GLP-1 concentrations are concurrently several-fold higher than usual. Our data clearly show the dual role of Arg in fish metabolism.