To improve the efficiency of CO(2) fixation in C(3) photosynthesis, C(4)-cycle genes were overexpressed in potato and tobacco plants either individually or in combination. Overexpression of the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PEPC) gene (ppc) from Corynebacterium glutamicum (cppc) or from potato (stppc, deprived of the phosphorylation site) in potato resulted in a 3-6-fold induction of endogenous cytosolic NADP malic enzyme (ME) and an increase in the activities of NAD-ME (3-fold), NADP isocitrate dehydrogenase (ICDH), pyruvate kinase (PK), NADP glycerate-3-P dehydrogenase (NADP-GAPDH), and PEP phosphatase (PEPP). In double transformants overexpressing cppc and chloroplastic NADP-ME from Flaveria pringlei (fpMe1), cytosolic NADP-ME was less induced and pleiotropic effects were diminished. There were no changes in enzyme pattern in single fpMe1 overexpressors. In cppc overexpressors of tobacco, the increase in endogenous cytosolic NADP-ME activity was small and changes in other enzymes were less pronounced. Determinations of the CO(2) compensation point (Gamma*) as well as temperature and oxygen effects on photosynthesis produced variational data suggesting that the desired decline in photorespiration occurred only under certain experimental conditions. Double transformants of potato (cppc/fpMe1) exhibited the most consistent attenuating effect on photorespiration. In contrast, photorespiration in tobacco plants appeared to be diminished most in single cppc overexpressors rather than in double transformants (cppc/fpMe1). In tobacco, introduction of the PEP carboxykinase (PEPCK) gene from the bacterium Sinorhizobium meliloti (pck) had little effect on photosynthetic parameters in single (pck) and double transformants (cppc/pck). In transgenic potato plants, increased PEPC activities resulted in a decline in UV protectants (flavonoids) in single cppc or stppc transformants, but not in double transformants (cppc/fpMe1). PEP provision to the shikimate pathway inside the plastids, from which flavonoids derive, might be restricted only in single PEPC overexpressors.