Bovine lung cGMP-binding cGMP-specific phosphodiesterase (cG-BPDE) is a potent and relatively specific substrate for cGMP-dependent protein kinase (cGK) as compared to cAMP-dependent protein kinase (cAK) (Thomas, M. K., Francis, S. H., and Corbin, J. D. (1990) J. Biol. Chem. 265, 14971-14978). A synthetic peptide, RKISASEFDRPLR (BPDEtide), was synthesized corresponding to the sequence surrounding the phosphorylation site in cG-BPDE. BPDEtide retained the cGK/cAK kinase specificity demonstrated by native cG-BPDE: the apparent Km of BPDEtide for cGK was 5-fold lower than that for cAK (Km = 68 and 320 microM, respectively). Vmax values were 11 mumol/min/mg for cGK and 3.2 mumol/min/mg for cAK. The peptide was not phosphorylated to a measurable extent by protein kinase C or by calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II. Thus, the primary amino acid sequence of the peptide substrate was sufficient to confer kinase specificity. Studies in crude tissue extracts indicated that BPDEtide was the most selective peptide substrate documented for measuring cGK activity. Peptide analogs of BPDEtide were synthesized to determine the contribution of specific residues to cGK or cAK substrate specificity. Substitution of a Lys for the amino-terminal Arg did not reduce cGK/cAK specificity; neither did the exchange of an Ala for the non-phosphorylated Ser nor the removal of the 3 carboxyl-terminal residues. A truncated BPDEtide (RKISASE) served equally well as substrate (Km approximately 90 microM) for both kinases. However, restoration of the Phe, to yield RKISASEF, reproduced the original cGK/cAK specificity for BPDEtide (Km = 120 and 480 microM, respectively), primarily by decreasing the affinity of cAK. Addition of a carboxyl-terminal Phe to the peptide RKRSRAE (derived from the sequence of the cGK phosphorylation site in histone H2B) or to the peptide LRRASLG (derived from the sequence of the cAK phosphorylation site in pyruvate kinase) also improved the cGK/cAK specificity by decreasing the affinity of cAK. These data suggested that the Phe in each substrate tested is a negative determinant for cAK.