A comprehensive approach to (13)C tracer studies, labeling measurements by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry, metabolite balancing, and isotopomer modeling, was applied for comparative metabolic network analysis of lysine-producing Corynebacterium glutamicum on glucose or fructose. Significantly reduced yields of lysine and biomass and enhanced formation of dihydroxyacetone, glycerol, and lactate in comparison to those for glucose resulted on fructose. Metabolic flux analysis revealed drastic differences in intracellular flux depending on the carbon source applied. On fructose, flux through the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) was only 14.4% of the total substrate uptake flux and therefore markedly decreased compared to that for glucose (62.0%). This result is due mainly to (i) the predominance of phosphoenolpyruvate-dependent phosphotransferase systems for fructose uptake (PTS(Fructose)) (92.3%), resulting in a major entry of fructose via fructose 1,6-bisphosphate, and (ii) the inactivity of fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase (0.0%). The uptake of fructose during flux via PTS(Mannose) was only 7.7%. In glucose-grown cells, the flux through pyruvate dehydrogenase (70.9%) was much less than that in fructose-grown cells (95.2%). Accordingly, flux through the tricarboxylic acid cycle was decreased on glucose. Normalized to that for glucose uptake, the supply of NADPH during flux was only 112.4% on fructose compared to 176.9% on glucose, which might explain the substantially lower lysine yield of C. glutamicum on fructose. Balancing NADPH levels even revealed an apparent deficiency of NADPH on fructose, which is probably overcome by in vivo activity of malic enzyme. Based on these results, potential targets could be identified for optimization of lysine production by C. glutamicum on fructose, involving (i) modification of flux through the two PTS for fructose uptake, (ii) amplification of fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase to increase flux through the PPP, and (iii) knockout of a not-yet-annotated gene encoding dihydroxyacetone phosphatase or kinase activity to suppress overflow metabolism. Statistical evaluation revealed high precision of the estimates of flux, so the observed differences for metabolic flux are clearly substrate specific.