Manganese (Mn) is a trace metal required for normal growth and development. Manganese neurotoxicity is rare and usually associated with occupational exposures. However, the cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying Mn toxicity are still elusive. In rats chronically exposed to Mn, their brain regional Mn levels increase in a dose-related manner. Brain Mn preferentially accumulates in mitochondria; this accumulation is further enhanced with Mn treatment in vivo. Exposure of mitochondria to Mn in vitro leads to uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation. These observations prompted us to investigate the hypothesis that Mn induces alterations in energy metabolism in neural cells by interfering with the activities of various glycolytic and TCA cycle enzymes using human neuroblastoma (SK-N-SH) and astrocytoma (U87) cells. Treatments of SK-N-SH and U87 cells with MnCl2 induced cell death in these cells, in a concentration- and time-dependent manner, as determined by MTT assays. In parallel with the Mn-induced, dose-dependent decrease in cell survival, treatment of these cells with 0.01 to 4.0 mM MnCl2 for 48 h also induced dose-related decreases in their activities of hexokinase, pyruvate kinase, lactate dehydrogenase, citrate synthase, and malate dehydrogenase. Hexokinase in SK-N-SH cells was the most affected by Mn treatments, even at the lower range of concentrations. Mn treatment of SK-N-SH cells affected pyruvate kinase and citrate synthase to a lesser extent as compared to its effect on other enzymes investigated. However, citrate synthase and pyruvate kinase in U87 cells were more vulnerable than other enzymes investigated to the effects of Mn. The results suggest the two cell types exhibited differential susceptibility toward the Mn-induced effects. Additionally, the results may have significant implications in flux control because HK is the first and highly regulated enzyme in brain glycolysis. Thus these results are consistent with our hypothesis and may have pathophysiological implications in the mechanisms underlying Mn neurotoxicity.