Malignant gliomas (astrocytomas) are lethal tumors that invade the brain. Invasive cell migration is initiated by extension of pseudopodia into interstitial spaces. In this study, U87 glioma cells formed pseudopodia in vitro as cells pushed through 3 microm pores of polycarbonate membranes. Harvesting pseudopodia in a novel two-step method provided material for proteomic analysis. Differences in the protein profiles of pseudopodia and whole cells were found using differential gel electrophoresis (DIGE) and immunoblotting. Proteins from two-dimensional (2D) gels with M(R)'s of 20-100 kDa and pI's of 3.0-10.0 were identified by peptide mass fingerprinting analysis using mass spectrometry. For DIGE, lysates of pseudopodia and whole cells were each labeled with electrophilic forms of fluorescent dyes, Cy3 or Cy5, and analyzed as mixtures. Analysis was repeated with reciprocal labeling. Differences in protein distributions were detected by manual inspection and computer analysis. Topographical digital maps of the scanned gels were used for algorithmic spot matching, normalization of background, quantifying spot differences, and elimination of artifacts. Pseudopodial proteins in Coomassie-stained 2D gels included isoforms of glycolytic enzymes as the largest group, seven of 24 proteins. Peptide mass fingerprint analysis of DIGE gels demonstrated increased isoforms of annexin (Anx) I, AnxII, enolase, pyruvate kinase, and aldolase, and decreased mitochondrial manganese superoxide dismutase and transketolase in pseudopodia. Specific antibodies showed restricted immunoreactivity of the hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) alpha chain to pseudopodia, indicating localization of its active form. Met (the HGF receptor), actin, and total AnxI were increased in pseudopodial lysates on immunoblots. Increased constituents of the pseudopodial proteome in glioma cells, identified in this study as actin, HGF, Met, and isoforms of AnxI, AnxII, and several glycolytic enzymes, represent therapeutic targets to consider for suppression of tumor invasion.