The activity of the enzymes of the oxidative non-phosphorylated pathway, glucose and gluconate dehydrogenases, were not significantly affected by changes in the assay temperature. Both enzymes demonstrated only a threefold difference in activity when compared at assay temperatures of 30 degrees C and 5 degrees C. In contrast, the enzymes involved in the direct phosphorylation and catabolism of glucose or its oxidation products, gluconate and 2-ketogluconate, exhibited a more pronounced response to decreasing assay temperatures. At least one enzyme in each pathway, involved in the direct phosphorylation and catabolism of glucose or 2-ketogluconate (2KG), demonstrated an eightfold decrease in activity with a decrease in assay temperature from 30 degrees C to 5 degrees C. A similar decrease in assay temperature resulted in a fivefold decrease in activity of the enzymes involved in the direct phosphorylation and catabolism of gluconate. The observed differential effect of temperature on the activity of the enzymes of glucose catabolism and on the accumulation of direct oxidation products during growth with glucose in P. fluorescens E-20 is discussed. Growth with glucose at 5 or 20 degrees C resulted in high induced levels of all glucose-catabolizing enzymes examined when compared with the levels of these same enzymes in pyruvate-grown cells. However, only low levels of glucose dehydrogenase were detected during growth at 30 degrees C with glucose, gluconate, or 2-KG. Similarly, only low levels of gluconate dehydrogenase were detected during growth with glucose at 30 degrees C, although a weak induction was observed during growth with gluconate or 2-KG at 30 degrees C. The levels of 2-KG kinase plus KPG reductase during growth at 30 degrees C were undetectable with glucose, weakly induced with gluconate, and fully induced with 2-KG. High induced levels of glucose dehydrogenase, gluconate dehydrogenase, and 2-KG kinase plus KPG reductase were present during growth at 20 degrees C with glucose or 2-KG. The low levels of glucose and gluconate dehydrogenases present at a growth temperature of 30 degrees C was not due to heat lability of the enzymes at this temperature. The low amounts of these two enzymes during growth with glucose at 30 degrees C probably prevented sufficient inducer(s) formation from glucose to allow induction of enzymes of 2-KG catabolism. The results demonstrated that temperature may regulate the pathways of glucose dissimilation by regulating, either directly or indirectly, the activity and synthesis of the enzymes involved in these pathways.