Pharmaceuticals and Personal Care Products (PPCPs) are a class of emerging environmental pollutants with the potential of affecting various aquatic organisms through unexpected modes of action. Triclosan (2,4,4'-trichloro-2'-hydroxydiphenyl ether) (TCS), is a common antibacterial agent that is found in significant amounts in the aquatic environment. In this work, the possible effects and modes of action of TCS were investigated in the marine bivalve Mytilus galloprovincialis Lam. In mussel immune cells, the hemocytes, in vitro short-term exposure to TCS in the low microM range reduced lysosomal membrane stability (LMS) and induced extracellular release of lysosomal hydrolytic enzymes. The effects on LMS were mediated by activation of ERK MAPKs (Extracellularly Regulated Mitogen Activated Protein Kinases) and PKC (protein kinase C) alpha and betaII isoforms, as demonstrated by both specific kinase inhibitors and Western blotting with specific anti-phospho-antibodies. The effects of TCS were confirmed in vivo, in the hemocytes of mussels injected with different concentrations of TCS (corresponding to 0.29, 2.9 and 29 ng/g dry weight) and sampled at 24 h post-injection. The possible in vivo effects of TCS were also evaluated on the activity of different enzymes in the digestive gland, the tissue mainly involved in accumulation and metabolism of organic contaminants in mussels. Significant increases were observed in the activity of the glycolytic enzymes PFK (phosphofructokinase) and PK (pyruvate kinase), as well as of GST (GSH transferase) and GSR (GSSG reductase), whereas a decrease in catalase activity was observed. The results demonstrate that in mussels TCS can act on kinase-mediated cell signalling, lysosomal membranes and redox balance in different systems/organs. Although further studies are needed in order to evaluate possible consequences of environmental exposure to TCS on mussel health, the results represent the first data on the possible modes of action of this widespread antibacterial in aquatic invertebrates.