A reversible interconversion of two kinetically distinct forms of hepatic pyruvate kinase regulated by glucagon and insulin is demonstrated in the perfused rat liver. The regulation does not involve the total enzyme content of the liver, but rather results in a modulation of the substrate dependence. The forms of pyruvate kinase in liver homogenates are distinguished by measurements of the ratio of the enzyme activity at a subsaturating concentration of P-enolpyruvate (1.3 mM) to the activity at a saturating concentration of this substrate (6.6 mM). A low ratio form of pyruvate kinase (ratio between 0.1 and 0.2) is obtained from livers perfused with 10(-7) M glucagon or 0.1 mM adenosine 3':5'-monophosphate (cyclic AMP). A high ratio form of the enzyme is obtained from livers perfused with no hormone (ratio = 0.35 to 0.45). The regulation of pyruvate kinase by glucagon and cyclic AMP occurs within 2 min following the hormone addition to the liver. Insulin (22 milliunits/ml) counteracts the inhibition of pyruvate kinase caused by 5 X 10(-11) M glucagon, but has only a slight influence on the enzyme properties in the absence of the hyperglycemic hormone. The low ratio form of pyruvate kinase obtained from livers perfused with glucagon or cyclic AMP is unstable in liver extracts and will revert to a high ratio form within 10 min at 37 degrees or within a few hours at 0 degrees. Pyruvate kinase is quantitatively precipitated from liver supernatants with 2.5 M ammonium sulfate. This precipitation stabilizes the enzyme and preserves the kinetically distinguishable forms. The kinetic properties of the two forms of rat hepatic pyruvate kinase are examined using ammonium sulfate precipitates from the perfused rat liver. At pH 7.5 the high ratio form of the enzyme has [S]0.5 = 1.6 +/- 0.2 mM P-enolpyruvate (n = 8). The low ratio form of enzyme from livers perfused with glucagon or cyclic AMP has [S]0.5 = 2.5 +/- 0.4 mM P-enolpyruvate (n = 8). The modification of pyruvate kinase induced by glucagon does not alter the dependence of the enzyme activity on ADP (Km is approximately 0.5 mM ADP for both forms of the enzyme). Both forms are allosterically modulated by fructose 1,6-bisphosphate, L-alanine, and ATP. The changes in the kinetic properties of hepatic pyruvate kinase which follow treating the perfused rat liver with glucagon or cyclic AMP are consistent with the changes observed in the enzyme properties upon phosphorylation in vitro by a clyclic AMP-stimulated protein kinase (Ljungstrom, O., Hjelmquist, G. and Engstrom, L. (1974) Biochim. Biophys. Acta 358, 289--298). However, other factors also influence the enzyme activity in a similar manner and it remains to be demonstrated that the regulation of hepatic pyruvate kinase by glucagon and cyclic AMP in vivo involes a phosphorylation.