We evaluated the effect of dietary starch level on growth performance, feed utilization, whole-body composition and activity of selected key enzymes of intermediary metabolism in gilthead sea bream juveniles reared at 18 and 25 degrees C. A diet was formulated to contain 48% crude protein, 12% lipids and 30% gelatinized maize starch (diet 30GS). Two other diets were formulated to include the same level of ingredients as diet 30GS except for the gelatinized starch, which was included at 20% (diet 20GS) or 10% (diet 10GS). No adjustment to diet composition was otherwise made. Each diet was fed to triplicate groups of gilthead sea bream (30 g initial mass) for 8 weeks, on a pair-feeding scheme. The higher temperature improved growth performance but the opposite was true for feed efficiency and protein efficiency ratio. Independently of temperature, growth performance, feed efficiency and protein efficiency ratio were lower in fish fed diet 30GS. No effect of temperature or dietary starch level on whole-body composition was noticed. Hepatosomatic index and liver glycogen were higher at 18 degrees C and, within each temperature, in fish fed diet 30GS. Glycemia was not affected by temperature, but was lower in fish fed diet 10GS. Data on enzyme activities showed that increasing water temperature enhances liver glucokinase (GK) and pyruvate kinase (PK) activities, suggesting that gilthead sea bream is more apt to use dietary starch at higher temperatures. No effect of temperature was noticed on hexokinase (HK), fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase (FBPase), glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) and glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH) activities. Dietary starch enhanced PK and FBPase activities while depressed GDH activity, suggesting a lack of significant regulation of hepatic glucose utilization and production in this species. HK, GK and G6PD activities were unaffected by dietary composition. Irrespectively of water temperature, gelatinized starch may be included up to 20% in diets for gilthead sea bream juveniles; at higher dietary levels, growth and efficiency of feed utilization are depressed.