The novel approach of using aqueous two-phase systems for the elution of protein from ligand-coupled particles is investigated using pyruvate kinase and alcohol dehydrogenase from recombinant Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Cibacron blue F3G-A-coupled Sepharose CL6B (Blue-Sepharose) particles as a model system. The ligand-coupled particles distribute quantitatively to the polyethylene glycol-(PEG-) rich top phase and the recovered enzymes partition selectively to the dextran-(DEX-) rich bottom phase. An effective recovery and partial purification of pyruvate kinase and alcohol dehydrogenase from Blue-Sepharose particles using PEG8000-DEXT500 aqueous two-phase systems are demonstrated through a modest increase of salt concentration. The bioselective eluting agent, MgADP, which is useful in chromatographic operations, is not required for the process using aqueous two-phase systems. Recovery of pyruvate kinase, which is bound to ligand-coupled particles, in the DEX-rich bottom phase of aqueous two-phase systems can be up to 95% in one-step operations. The mixing time of ligand-coupled particles with aqueous two-phase systems is a major controlling variable. The salt concentration, the molecular weight of polymer, and the total volume of aqueous two-phase systems also influence the recovery of pyruvate kinase from ligand-coupled particles. The recovered enzymes in the DEX-rich bottom phase remain biologically stable over a long period of storage time. The concentration of product protein in a reduced volume and the easy separation from ligand-coupled particles are added advantages of the process using aqueous two-phase systems. Preliminary studies with goat polyclonal anti-pyruvate kinase-coupled Sepharose particles indicate that the process also may be applicable when a high-affinity ligand such as antibody is used. The experimental results and a theoretical derivation based on equilibrium models for binding/dissociation of ligands and proteins show that the process results in better recovery as compared to that of conventional bulk elution techniques.