The effect of di(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate (DEHP) on diethylnitrosamine (DEN)-initiated preneoplastic liver lesions with expression of gamma-glutamyltranspeptidase (GGTase) and loss of adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) as well as alterations of hepatic carbohydrate metabolism in male and female Sprague-Dawley rats have been investigated. Two treatment schedules have been compared with respect to their sensitivity by the histochemical demonstration of preneoplastic islands and by the biochemical determination of alterations in enzyme activities of liver homogenates and of serum, the last indicating hepatotoxicity. For initiation, a single dose of DEN was given, followed by treatment with various doses of DEHP given three times weekly by gavage for 7 or 11 consecutive weeks. As histochemical enzyme markers, the expression of positive GGTase as well as the deficiency in ATPase were used for identification of liver foci. The weanling female rats (protocol A) were found to be more sensitive to the carcinogenic effect of DEN in view of foci incidence than the mature male rats which underwent partial hepatectomy prior to DEN application. The administration of 200 mg DEHP/kg body wt increased the incidence of ATPase-deficient foci in both male and female rats; however, concentrations of 1000 and 2000 mg DEHP/kg decreased the incidence of liver foci. The number of foci with expression of GGTase was only slightly increased in female rats following a DEHP concentration of 50 mg/kg, and 200 mg/kg body wt. DEHP alone did not induce preneoplastic lesions that could be identified by these two markers. Biochemical investigations indicate that DEHP alters the metabolic pattern in liver. An increase of the NADP-linked enzymes glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PDH), malic enzyme, extra-mitochondrial ICDH as well as an enhancement of NAD-dependent alpha-G3PDH and lactate dehydrogenase were found following DEHP administration. On the other hand the glycolytic enzymes pyruvate kinase (PK) and enolase as well as the gluconeogenetic enzyme fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase (FBPase) were significantly reduced. In protocol B (male rats) the reactions of PK, FBPase and malic enzyme were more altered after DEHP exposure than in protocol A, while the activity of G6PDH was more increased in protocol A. Most enzymes being involved in the carbohydrate metabolism are influenced by DEHP in a dose-dependent manner. There was no increase in serum FBPase activity in both male and female rats after DEHP treatment but a reduction of glutamate-oxalate-transaminase and glutamate-pyruvate-transaminase activities was observed.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)