This study investigates the effects of exogenous thyroxine (T4) on running endurance, tissue masses, and the activities of citrate synthase (CS), pyruvate kinase (PK), cytosolic alpha-glycerophosphate dehydrogenase (alpha-GPDH), and beta-hydroxyacyl Coenzyme A dehydrogenase (HOAD) in Sceloporus undulatus (eastern fence lizard). The enzymes were assayed to indicate maximal catabolic activities that support exercise. Parallel experiments were done on captive and field-active groups to determine whether responses in captive studies adequately predict responses in nature. Exogenous T4 was administered via intraperitoneal pellets. The effect of T4 on running endurance was dependent on the location of the experiment (P = 0.040) such that stamina was increased by T4 only in field-active lizards. At lower levels of biological organization, interactivity between T4 and experimental location was evident but less prevalent than at the level of the whole animal, and some location effects occurred independent of T4 treatment. Heart and kidney masses were significantly greater and total hind leg muscle mass was less in captive than in field-active lizards. Thyroxine reduced liver mass in both locations and kidney mass only in captive lizards. Mass-specific CS and alpha-GPDH in gastrocnemius muscle (mixed fiber type) and HOAD in heart were lower in captive than in field-active lizards; PK in heart and liver and alpha-GPDH in heart were higher in captive lizards. Thyroxine increased CS in liver and HOAD in heart, decreased alpha-GPDH in liver in both locations, and decreased alpha-GPDH in gastrocnemius only in captive lizards. The effects of T4 differed significantly between experimental locations in gastrocnemius muscle (T4 decreased PK only in captive lizards) and in liver (T4 increased PK in field-active lizards and decreased PK in captive lizards). The mechanistic basis of differences in stamina between captive and field-active and between placebo and T4-treated lizards is largely unexplained by the factors measured here, thus illustrating the uncertainty of predicting organismal performance from lower level measurements. Nonetheless, T4 has now been shown to have greater physiological activity in field-active than in captive Sceloporus with regard to resting and total daily metabolic rates and running endurance. The results of this study further confirm that endocrine experiments on captive animals may not predict responses in nature. Further efforts to clarify the physiological significance of seasonal variations in levels of thyroid hormones will have to involve, at least in part, invasive studies on field-active lizards.