AIMS: Protein S-glutathionylation is a widely distributed post-translational modification of thiol groups with glutathione that can function as a redox-sensitive switch to mediate redox regulation and signal transduction. The malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum is exposed to intense oxidative stress and possesses the enzymatic system required to regulate protein S-glutathionylation, but despite its potential importance, protein S-glutathionylation has not yet been studied in malaria parasites. In this work we applied a method based on enzymatic deglutathionylation, affinity purification of biotin-maleimide-tagged proteins, and proteomic analyses to characterize the Plasmodium glutathionylome. RESULTS: We identified 493 targets of protein S-glutathionylation in Plasmodium. Functional profiles revealed that the targets are components of central metabolic pathways, such as nitrogen compound metabolism and protein metabolism. Fifteen identified proteins with important functions in metabolic pathways (thioredoxin reductase, thioredoxin, thioredoxin peroxidase 1, glutathione reductase, glutathione S-transferase, plasmoredoxin, mitochondrial dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase, glutamate dehydrogenase 1, glyoxalase I and II, ornithine delta-aminotransferase, lactate dehydrogenase, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase [GAPDH], pyruvate kinase [PK], and phosphoglycerate mutase) were further analyzed to study their ability to form mixed disulfides with glutathione. We demonstrate that P. falciparum GAPDH, PK, and ornithine delta-aminotransferase are reversibly inhibited by S-glutathionylation. Further, we provide evidence that not only P. falciparum glutaredoxin 1, but also thioredoxin 1 and plasmoredoxin are able to efficiently catalyze protein deglutathionylation. INNOVATION: We used an affinity-purification based proteomic approach to characterize the Plasmodium glutathionylome. CONCLUSION: Our results indicate a wide regulative use of S-glutathionylation in the malaria parasite and contribute to our understanding of redox-regulatory processes in this pathogen.