This study investigated the effects of constant and cyclic heat stress on muscle metabolism and meat quality of broiler breast fillet and thigh meat from 4 to 6 wk of age. Male Arbor Acres (AA) broilers (n = 270, 4 wk old) were raised under different temperature conditions: standard (temperature was 23 degrees C); constant high temperature (temperature was 34 degrees C); and cyclic high temperature (temperature was 36 degrees C from 1000 h to 1600 h and 23 degrees C from 1600 h to 1000 h). On d 42, broilers were stunned and sampled. The results showed that chronic high temperature significantly decreased the proportion of breast muscle and significantly increased the proportion of thigh muscle (P < 0.05). The moisture concentration was significantly higher in the breast muscle of the birds exposed to constant high temperature (P < 0.05), whereas the protein content was significantly lower (P < 0.05) and fat deposition was significantly higher (P < 0.05) in the breast muscle of the birds exposed to constant or diurnal cyclic high temperature than those grown under standard temperature. The breast and thigh muscle of the birds grown under constant high temperature had significantly higher lightness, cook loss, and shear force (P < 0.05) and significantly lower initial pH (pH(i)), ultimate pH (pH(u)), and redness compared with those grown under standard temperature (P < 0.05). The pH(i), pH(u), and redness were significantly lower (P < 0.05) while the lightness and shear force were significantly higher for the breast muscle of the chickens raised under diurnal cyclic high temperature (P < 0.05) than those grown under standard temperature. In contrast, lightness and yellowness of thigh muscle were significantly higher (P < 0.05) in the chickens grown under diurnal cyclic high temperature than under standard temperature. Breast and thigh muscle of broilers exposed to constant high temperature produced higher (P < 0.05) lactic acid and pyruvate kinase activities than those exposed to the standard temperature. These results indicated that chronic heat stress significantly increased lactate production, reduced meat pH value by accelerating meat glycolysis, and eventually reduced meat quality.