Human red cells were incubated at pH 8.2 and 30 mM phosphate concentration with glucose, glucose plus methylene blue, or inosine. In 16 normal subjects, the lactate production rate (LPR) from glucose alone was 92.2 +/- 7.5 mumoles per minute per liter red blood cell. With methylene blue added, the mean LPR was 118.5 +/- 7.4 per cent of control glucose values. With inosine as substrate the mean LPR was 68.5 +/- 6.0 per cent of that from glucose. Lactate/glucose ratios averaged 1.36, presumably because of accumulation of intermediates under conditions of high pH and Pi. Patients with various kinds of anemias had LPR's from glucose that were usually markedly higher than normal, but the LPR's from inosine were generally about 2/3 of those from glucose. The LPR's of the anemic patients correlated with their degree of reticulocytosis and several patients with pyruvate kinase (PK) deficiency showed normal LPR if the red cell population age was ignored, byt marked depression when compared to expected LPR for degree of reticulocytosis. The LPR from glucose of red cells of G6PD-deficient subjects was decreased (not increased) by methylene blue. Methylene blue, while stimulating the pentose phosphate pathway, also mediated some oxidation of NADH, thus complicating the stoichiometry of the overall system. In addition, the results suggested that the dye may have attacked -SH groups on some enzymes. In normal red cells, the lower LPR from inosine than from glucose was explained as due to consumption of ATP for hexose utilization (thus generating more ADP for the triose reactions). In confirmation, when red cells were incubated without substrate to deplete their ATP-, and enhance their ADP-, levels, the LPR from inosine exceeded that from glucose. Fluoride and iodoacetate affected LPR from glucose more than from inosine, suggesting the necessity of adequate ATP levels in hexose utilization. Overall glycolysis in the red cell is seen as the resultant of a network of metabolic reactions in which ADP and ATP levels are important control parameters.