Leaves on transgenic tobacco plants expressing yeast-derived invertase in the apoplast develop clearly demarcated green and bleached sectors when they mature. The green areas contain low levels of soluble sugars and starch which are turned over on a daily basis, and have high rates of photosynthesis and low rates of respiration. The pale areas accumulate carbohydrate, photosynthesis is inhibited, and respiration increases. This provides a model system to investigate the "sink" regulation of photosynthetic metabolism by accumulating carbohydrate. The inhibition of photosynthesis is accompanied by a decrease of ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate and glycerate-3-phosphate, and an increase of triosephosphate and fructose-1,6-bisphosphate. The extracted activities of ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase, fructose-1, 6-bisphosphatase and NADP-glyeraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase decreased. The activity of sucrose-phosphate synthase remained high or increased, an increased portion of the photosynthate was partitioned into soluble sugars rather than starch, and the pale areas showed few or no oscillations during transitions between darkness and saturating light in saturating CO2. The increased rate of respiration was accompanied by an increased level of hexose-phosphates, triose-phosphates and fructose-1,6-bisphosphate while glycerate-3-phosphate and phosphoenolpyruvate decreased and pyruvate increased. The activities of pyruvate kinase, phosphofructokinase and pyrophosphate: fructose-6-phosphate phosphotransferase increased two- to four-fold. We conclude that an increased level of carbohydrate leads to a decreased level of Calvin-cycle enzymes and, thence, to an inhibition of photosynthesis. It also leads to an increased level of glycolytic enzymes and, thence, to a stimulation of respiration. These changes of enzymes are more important in middle- or long-term adjustments to high carbohydrate levels in the leaf than fine regulation due to depletion of inorganic phosphate or high levels of phosphorylated metabolites.