The differential availability of iron during hypoxia is presumed to affect the functioning of cardiac and skeletal myocytes. Rat H9C2 cardiomyocytes and L6G8C5 myocytes were cultured for 48 h in normoxic or hypoxic conditions at the optimal, reduced or increased iron concentration. The mRNA expression levels of markers of apoptosis [Bcell lymphoma2 (Bcl2; inhibition) and Bcl2activated X protein (Bax; induction)], atrophy (Atrogin), glycolysis (pyruvate kinase 2; PKM2) and iron metabolism [transferrin receptor 1 (TfR1; iron importer), ferroportin 1 (FPN1; iron exporter), ferritin heavy chain (FTH; iron storage protein) and hepcidin (HAMP; iron regulator)] were determined using reverse transcriptionquantitative polymerase chain reaction, and cell viability was measured using an tetrazolium reduction assay. Cardiomyocytes and myocytes, when exposed to hypoxia, demonstrated an increased Bax/Bcl2 gene expression ratio (P<0.05). Additional deferoxamine (DFO) treatment resulted in further increases in Bax/Bcl2 in each cell type (P<0.001 each) and this was associated with the 15% loss in viability. The analogous alterations were observed in both cell types upon ammonium ferric citrate (AFC) treatment during hypoxia; however, the increased Bax/Bcl2 ratio and associated viability loss was lower compared with that in case of DFO treatment (P<0.05 each). Under hypoxic conditions, myocytes demonstrated an increased expression of PKM2 (P<0.01). Additional DFO treatment caused an increase in the mRNA expression levels of PKM2 and Atrogin1 (P<0.001 and P<0.05, respectively), whereas AFC treatment caused an increased mRNA expression of PKM2 (P<0.01) and accompanied decreased mRNA expression of Atrogin1 (P<0.05). The expression augmentation of PKM2 during hypoxia was greater upon low iron compared with that of ferric salt treatment (P<0.01). Both cell types upon DFO during hypoxia demonstrated the increased expression of TfR1 and HAMP (all P<0.05), which was associated with the increased Bax/Bcl2 ratio (all R>0.6 and P<0.05). In conclusion, during hypoxia iron deficiency impairs the viability of cardiomyocytes and myocytes more severely compared with iron excess. In myocytes, during hypoxia iron may act in a protective manner, since the level of atrophy is decreased in the ironsalttreated cells.