In human leukaemia, resistance to chemotherapy leads to treatment ineffectiveness or failure. Previous studies have indicated that cancers with increased levels of aerobic glycolysis are insensitive to numerous forms of chemotherapy and respond poorly to radiotherapy. Whether glycolysis serves a key role in drug resistance of leukaemia cells remains unclear. The present study systematically investigated aerobic glycolytic alterations and regulation in K562/adriamycin (ADM) multidrugresistant (MDR) and ADMsensitive K562 leukaemia cells in normoxia, and the association between drug resistance and improper glycometabolism. The cell proliferating activity was assessed with an MTT colorimetric assay, glycolysis, including glucose consumption, lactate export and keyenzyme activity was determined by corresponding commercial testing kits. The expression levels of hexokinaseII (HKII), lactate dehydrogenase A (LDHA), glucose transporter4 (GLUT4), AKT, pAKT473/308, mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), pmTOR, cMyc and hypoxiainducible factor1alpha (HIF1alpha) were analyzed by western blot or reverse transcriptionquantitative polymerase chain reaction (RTqPCR). K562/ADM cells exhibited increased glucose consumption and lactate accumulation, increased lactate dehydrogenase, hexokinase and pyruvate kinase activities, and reduced phosphofructokinase activity. In addition, K562/ADM cells expressed significantly more HKII and GLUT4. Notably, inhibition of glycolysis effectively killed sensitive and resistant leukaemia cells and potently restored the sensitivity of MDR cells to the anticancer agent ADM. The AKT serine/threonine kinase (AKT)/mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) signalling pathway, a crucial regulator of glycometabolic homeostasis, mediated overactivation and upregulation of cMyc expression levels in K562/ADM cells, which directly stimulated glucose consumption and enhanced glycolysis. In conclusion, the present study demonstrated that MDR leukaemia cells exhibit increased aerobic glycolytic activity and that this may be responsible for resistance to chemotherapeutics in leukaemia MDR cells via activation of the AKTmTORcMyc signalling pathway. Therefore, inhibition of aerobic glycolysis may be a potential therapeutic strategy to efficiently treat multidrug resistance in relapsed or refractory leukaemia and cancers.