The canonical Wnt/beta-catenin pathway is up-regulated in gliomas and involved in proliferation, invasion, apoptosis, vasculogenesis and angiogenesis. Nuclear beta-catenin accumulation correlates with malignancy. Hypoxia activates hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1alpha by inhibiting HIF-1alpha prolyl hydroxylation, which promotes glycolytic energy metabolism, vasculogenesis and angiogenesis, whereas HIF-1alpha is degraded by the HIF prolyl hydroxylase under normoxic conditions. We focus this review on the links between the activated Wnt/beta-catenin pathway and the mechanisms underlying vasculogenesis and angiogenesis through HIF-1alpha under normoxic conditions in gliomas. Wnt-induced epidermal growth factor receptor/phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt signaling, Wnt-induced signal transducers and activators of transcription 3 (STAT3) signaling, and Wnt/beta-catenin target gene transduction (c-Myc) can activate HIF-1alpha in a hypoxia-independent manner. The PI3K/Akt/mammalian target of rapamycin pathway activates HIF-1alpha through eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E-binding protein 1 and STAT3. The beta-catenin/T-cell factor 4 complex directly binds to STAT3 and activates HIF-1alpha, which up-regulates the Wnt/beta-catenin target genes cyclin D1 and c-Myc in a positive feedback loop. Phosphorylated STAT3 by interleukin-6 or leukemia inhibitory factor activates HIF-1alpha even under normoxic conditions. The activation of the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway induces, via the Wnt target genes c-Myc and cyclin D1 or via HIF-1alpha, gene transactivation encoding aerobic glycolysis enzymes, such as glucose transporter, hexokinase 2, pyruvate kinase M2, pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 1 and lactate dehydrogenase-A, leading to lactate production, as the primary alternative of ATP, at all oxygen levels, even in normoxic conditions. Lactate released by glioma cells via the monocarboxylate lactate transporter-1 up-regulated by HIF-1alpha and lactate anion activates HIF-1alpha in normoxic endothelial cells by inhibiting HIF-1alpha prolyl hydroxylation and preventing HIF labeling by the von Hippel-Lindau protein. Increased lactate with acid environment and HIF-1alpha overexpression induce the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) pathway of vasculogenesis and angiogenesis under normoxic conditions. Hypoxia and acidic pH have no synergistic effect on VEGF transcription.