The present study investigated the antiobesity effects of enzymetreated Ecklonia cava extract (EEc) in C57BL/6N mice with highfat diet (HFD)induced obesity. The EEc was separated and purified with the digestive enzymes pectinase (Rapidase XPress L) and cellulase (Rohament CL) and its effects on the progression of HFDinduced obesity were examined over 10 weeks. The mice were divided into 6 groups (n=10/group) as follows: Normal diet group, HFD group, mice fed a HFD with 25 mg/kg/day Garcinia cambogia extract and mice fed a HFD with 5, 25 or 150 mg/kg/day EEc (EHD groups). Changes in body weight, fat, serum lipid levels and lipogenic enzyme levels were determined. The body weight and liver weight were increased in the HFD group compared with those in the ND group, which was significantly reduced by EEc supplementation. In addition, significant reductions in epididymal, perirenal and mesenteric white adipose tissues were present in the EHD groups and all three EHD groups exhibited decreases in insulin, leptin and glutamate pyruvate transaminase levels compared with those in the HFD group. In addition, EEc treatment significantly decreased the serum and hepatic triglyceride levels compared with those in the HFD group. However, the levels of highdensity lipoprotein cholesterol/total cholesterol ration increased significantly in EHD25 and 150 groups compared with those in the HFD group. Changes in adipogenic and lipogenic protein expression in the liver was assessed by western blot analysis. The EHD25 and -150 groups exhibited reduced levels of CCAAT/enhancerbinding protein alpha and peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma. However, the phosphorylation ratios of AMPactivated protein kinase and acetylCoA carboxylase were significantly increased in the liver tissue obtained from the EHD (5, 25 and 150 mg/kg/day) groups compared with those in the HFD group. EEc supplementation reduced levels of sterol regulatory elementbinding protein1c, adipose fatty acidbinding protein, fatty acid synthase and leptin, while it significantly increased glucose transporter type 4 and adiponectin protein levels in the liver tissues of all three EHD groups compared with those in the HFD group. Taken together, these results suggest that EEc exerts antiobesity effects by reducing body weight and the serum and hepatic levels of obesityassociated factors. Thus, EEc supplementation reduces HFDinduced obesity in C57BL/6N mice and has the potential to prevent obesity and subsequent metabolic disorders.