Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection has been shown to regulate microRNA 130a (miR-130a) in patient biopsy specimens and in cultured cells. We sought to identify miR-130a target genes and to explore the mechanisms by which miR-130a regulates HCV and hepatitis B virus (HBV) replication. We used bioinformatics software, including miRanda, TargetScan, PITA, and RNAhybrid, to predict potential miR-130a target genes. miR-130a and its target genes were overexpressed or were knocked down by use of small interfering RNA (siRNA) or clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat (CRISPR)/Cas9 guide RNA (gRNA). Selected gene mRNAs and their proteins, together with HCV replication in OR6 cells, HCV JFH1-infected Huh7.5.1 cells, and HCV JFH1-infected primary human hepatocytes (PHHs) and HBV replication in HepAD38 cells, HBV-infected NTCP-Huh7.5.1 cells, and HBV-infected PHHs, were measured by quantitative reverse transcription-PCR (qRT-PCR) and Western blotting, respectively. We selected 116 predicted target genes whose expression was related to viral pathogenesis or immunity for qPCR validation. Of these, the gene encoding pyruvate kinase in liver and red blood cell (PKLR) was confirmed to be regulated by miR-130a overexpression. miR-130a overexpression (via a mimic) knocked down PKLR mRNA and protein levels. A miR-130a inhibitor and gRNA increased PKLR expression, HCV replication, and HBV replication, while miR-130a gRNA and PKLR overexpression increased HCV and HBV replication. Supplemental pyruvate increased HCV and HBV replication and rescued the inhibition of HCV and HBV replication by the miR-130a mimic and PKLR knockdown. We concluded that miR-130a regulates HCV and HBV replication through its targeting of PKLR and subsequent pyruvate production. Our data provide novel insights into key metabolic enzymatic pathway steps regulated by miR-130a, including the steps involving PKLR and pyruvate, which are subverted by HCV and HBV replication.IMPORTANCE We identified that miR-130a regulates the target gene PKLR and its subsequent effect on pyruvate production. Pyruvate is a key intermediate in several metabolic pathways, and we identified that pyruvate plays a key role in regulation of HCV and HBV replication. This previously unrecognized, miRNA-regulated antiviral mechanism has implications for the development of host-directed strategies to interrupt the viral life cycle and prevent establishment of persistent infection for HCV, HBV, and potentially other viral infections.