AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Increased serum follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) is correlated with fasting hyperglycaemia. However, the underlying mechanism remains unclear. Because excessive hepatic gluconeogenesis is a major cause of fasting hyperglycaemia the present study investigated whether FSH increases hepatic gluconeogenesis in mice. METHODS: Ovariectomised mice supplemented with oestradiol (E2) to maintain normal levels of serum E2 (OVX+E2 mice) were injected with low or high doses of FSH. We knocked out Crtc2, a crucial factor in gluconeogenesis, and Fshr to discern their involvement in FSH signalling. To evaluate the role of the G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) kinase 2 (GRK2), which could affect glucose metabolism and interact directly with non-GPCR components, a specific GRK2 inhibitor was used. The pyruvate tolerance test (PTT), quantification of PEPCK and glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase), key enzymes of gluconeogenesis, GRK2 and phosphorylation of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) were examined to evaluate the level of gluconeogenesis in the liver. A nonphosphorylatable mutant of AMPK Ser485 (AMPK S485A) was transfected into HepG2 cells to evaluate the role of AMPK Ser485 phosphorylation. RESULTS: FSH increased fasting glucose (OVX+E2+high-dose FSH 8.18 +/- 0.60 mmol/l vs OVX+E2 6.23 +/- 1.33 mmol/l), the PTT results, and the transcription of Pepck (also known as Pck1; 2.0-fold increase) and G6pase (also known as G6pc; 2.5-fold increase) in OVX+E2 mice. FSH also enhanced the promoter luciferase activities of the two enzymes in HepG2 cells. FSH promoted the membrane translocation of GRK2, which is associated with increased AMPK Ser485 and decreased AMPK Thr172 phosphorylation, and enhanced the nuclear translocation of cyclic AMP-regulated transcriptional coactivator 2 (CRTC2). GRK2 could bind with AMPK and induce Ser485 hyperphosphorylation. Furthermore, either the GRK2 inhibitor or AMPK S485A blocked FSH-regulated AMPK Thr172 dephosphorylation and gluconeogenesis. Additionally, the deletion of Crtc2 or Fshr abolished the function of FSH in OVX+E2 mice. CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The results indicate that FSH enhances CRTC2-mediated gluconeogenesis dependent on AMPK Ser485 phosphorylation via GRK2 in the liver, suggesting an essential role of FSH in the pathogenesis of fasting hyperglycaemia.