Primary hepatocyte culture is an important in vitro system for the study of liver functions. In vivo, hepatocytes have high oxidative metabolism. However, oxygen supply by means of diffusion in in vitro static cultures is much less than that by blood circulation in vivo. Therefore, we investigated whether hypoxia contributes to dedifferentiation and deregulated metabolism in cultured hepatocytes. To this end, murine hepatocytes were cultured under static or shaken (60 revolutions per minute) conditions in a collagen sandwich. The effect of hypoxia on hepatocyte cultures was examined by metabolites in media and cells, hypoxia-inducible factors (HIF)-1/2alpha western blotting, and real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction for HIF target genes and key genes of glucose and lipid metabolism. Hepatocytes in shaken cultures showed lower glycolytic activity and triglyceride accumulation than static cultures, compatible with improved oxygen delivery and mitochondrial energy metabolism. Consistently, static cultures displayed significant HIF-2alpha expression, which was undetectable in freshly isolated hepatocytes and shaken cultures. Transcript levels of HIF target genes (glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase [Gapdh], glucose transporter 1 [Glut1], pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 1 [Pdk1], and lactate dehydrogenase A [Ldha]) and key genes of lipid metabolism, such as carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1 (Cpt1), apolipoprotein B (Apob), and acetyl-coenzyme A carboxylase 1 (Acc1), were significantly lower in shaken compared to static cultures. Moreover, expression of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (Hnf4alpha) and farnesoid X receptor (Fxr) were better preserved in shaken cultures as a result of improved oxygen delivery. We further revealed that HIF-2 signaling was involved in hypoxia-induced down-regulation of Fxr. Conclusion: Primary murine hepatocytes in static culture suffer from hypoxia. Improving oxygenation by simple shaking prevents major changes in expression of metabolic enzymes and aberrant triglyceride accumulation; in addition, it better maintains the differentiation state of the cells. The shaken culture is, therefore, an advisable strategy for the use of primary hepatocytes as an in vitro model. (Hepatology Communications 2018;2:299-312).