The involvement of 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase, fructose 2,6-bisphosphate [Fru(2,6)P2] and pyruvate kinase in the insulin-dependent short-term activation of glycolysis was studied in primary cultures of rat hepatocytes. The short-term influence of insulin on these parameters was dependent on the insulin concentration used for the long-term culture. Cells were cultured either with 10 nM or 0.1 nM insulin for 48 h, and are referred to as 'insulin cells' and 'control cells', respectively. Insulin cells exhibited a high level of Fru(2,6)P2. Addition of insulin to insulin cells led to an immediate stimulation of glycolysis (two-fold) and activation of pyruvate kinase. The concentration of Fru(2,6)P2 and activity of 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase remained constant. Control cells exhibited a very low level of Fru(2,6)P2 and low activity of 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase directly after the medium change. However, both parameters increased during a 1-2-h incubation in the absence of insulin. Although the level of Fru(2,6)P2 thus changed up to tenfold the glycolytic rate remained at a constant value. Addition of insulin to control cells led to a 5-8-fold stimulation of glycolysis but only after a 30-90-min lag phase. During this lag period insulin strongly increased sequentially the 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase, the level of Fru(2,6)P2 and the pyruvate kinase activity. The activation of the latter enzyme slightly preceded the onset of the insulin-stimulated glycolysis. Addition of insulin to control cells, which were preincubated for 3 h in the absence of insulin and in which the Fru(2,6)P2 level had risen insulin-independently, led to an immediate increase in glycolysis without a lag phase. It is concluded that in this insulin-sensitive cell system: the changes of glycolytic flux did not correlate with changes in the level of total Fru(2,6)P2 either in insulin or in control cells; an increase in the Fru(2,6)P2 concentration was not obligatory for the insulin-dependent stimulation of glycolysis in insulin cells; activation of pyruvate kinase and thus glycolysis by insulin did not proceed unless the Fru(2,6)P2 level had been elevated above a threshold level. The lack of correlation between total Fru(2,6)P2 levels and the glycolytic flux and the apparent existence of a threshold concentration for Fru(2,6)P2 suggest a permissive action for this effector in enzyme interconversion.