Trypanosoma cruzi (epimastigotes), Crithidia fasciculata and Leishmania mexicana (promastigotes) were grown in a brain-heart-tryptose medium supplemented with heat-inactivated fetal calf serum. T. cruzi and C. fasciculata utilized glucose completely during the log phase of growth, whereas L. mexicana used significant amounts of the carbohydrate only at the end of the log phase and at the beginning of the stationary phase. In all cases glucose consumption resulted in excretion of succinate, and much smaller amounts of acetate. C. fasciculata and L. mexicana produced very small amounts of pyruvate. C. fasciculata produced ethanol, which was taken up again and metabolysed after glucose was exhausted. Lactate and malate were not produced. The cells were disrupted by sonic disintegration, and the activities of some key enzymes of carbohydrate and amino acid catabolism were assayed in the whole homogenates. Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase was present in the three organisms; L. mexicana presented the highest specific activity. The activity of this enzyme was maximal during glucose consumption, and slightly decreased after glucose was exhausted. This suggests that the role played by the enzyme is glycolytic and not gluconeogenic; the latter is the case in most higher organisms. Hexokinase and pyruvate kinase presented their highest levels in C. fasciculata and T. cruzi during glucose consumption. L. mexicana, which was in active glycolysis during the whole experimental period, presented the highest specific activities of both enzymes. Citrate synthase, on the other hand, increased in C. fasciculata and, to a lesser extent, in T. cruzi, after glucose was exhausted; the enzyme could not be detected in L. mexicana. The NAD-linked glutamate dehydrogenase increased considerably in C. fasciculata and T. cruzi after glucose was exhausted, suggesting a catabolic role for the enzyme. This increase coincided with an increase in NH3 production by both organisms after glucose consumption. The NADP-linked glutamate dehydrogenase, on the other hand, presented a maximum about the time when glucose was exhausted, and then decreased again, which suggests a catabolic role for the enzyme. Both glutamate dehydrogenases had low activities in L. mexicana; this fits in well with the low NH3 production throughout the culture of this organism. The results are in good agreement with current ideas on the mechanism of aerobic glucose fermentation by trypanosomatids, and suggest that, under the experimental conditions used, both T. cruzi and C. fasciculata used glucose perferentially over amino acids for growth.