Pyruvate kinase L (PKL), the glucoregulatory isoenzyme of adult parenchymal cells, and M2 (PKM2), the isoenzyme of proliferating and non-parenchymal cells, were measured, using a specific anti-PKL antibody for differentiation, in total liver homogenates, in isolated parenchymal and non-parenchymal cells as well as in microdissected periportal and perivenous liver tissue from regenerating rat liver after two-thirds partial hepatectomy. Moreover, the zonal distribution of PKL was studied using immunohistochemical techniques. In total liver homogenates PKL activity per g liver decreased after partial hepatectomy, while PKM2 increased. Total PKL activity per 100 g body weight was restored to preoperational levels much more slowly than liver weight. During liver regeneration parenchymal cells acquired high PKM2 besides PKL activity. The isoenzyme outfit of non-parenchymal cells remained unchanged. Microdissection studies showed that PKL lost its normal perivenous to periportal gradient after partial hepatectomy and became evenly distributed within the liver acinus. PKM2 did not retain its even distribution, it became predominant in the periportal zone. Immunohistochemical staining revealed that after partial hepatectomy PKL was present in all parenchymal cells in an atypical non-zonal heterogeneous distribution. Normal specific activities as well as zonal and cellular distributions of both pyruvate kinase isoenzymes were restored 14-21 d after partial hepatectomy. During regeneration after 2/3 partial hepatectomy the liver loses its glucostat function as corroborated in this study by the decrease of the glycolytic capacity via the glucoregulatory PKL; this change of function is accompanied by a loss of PKL-zonation. This finding corroborates the view that zonation of carbohydrate-metabolizing enzymes is required only when the liver functions as a glucostat. The increase of PKM2 and the appearance of a zonal PKM2 heterogeneity are in line with the pattern of hepatocyte proliferation after partial hepatectomy.