Human platelets were separated by desity-centrifugation into heavy and light populations. Heavy platelets have an average volume approximately twofold greater than light platelets, and have previously been shown to be young platelets. All 11 enzymes of the Embden-Meyerhof pathway plus the five related enzymes: phosphoglucomutase, glucose-6-P dehydrogenase, 6-P-gluconic dehydrogenase, alpha-glycerol-P dehydrogenase, and glutathione reductase (TPNH) were examined in cell lysates from total, heavy, and light platelet populations. Apparent Km for individual enzymes were measured in a total platelet population. Empirical V(max) of the individual enzymes were measured in total, heavy, and light platelet populations. The three apparent rate-limiting enzymes for glycolysis were hexokinase, phosphofructokinase, and glyceraldehyde-3-P dehydrogenase. Heavy platelets contained approximately twofold greater enzyme activity (per gram wet weight) than light platelets for 7 of the 16 enzymes measured: hexokinase, phosphohexoisomerase, phosphofructokinase, glyceraldehyde-3-P dehydrogenase, phosphoglycerokinase, lactic dehydrogenase, and phosphoglucomutase. Heavy platelets also contained 1.9-fold greater reduced glutathione (GSH), 1.7-fold greater DPNH, and 1.2-fold greater TPNH than light platelets. Heavy platelets contained 1.8-fold less lipid peroxidation products (malonyl aldehyde equivalents) than light platelets and were 2.4-fold more resistant to lipid peroxidation catalyzed by 0.1 mM FeCl(3). Sterile incubation of heavy platelets, in vitro for 17 hr, resulted in a significant loss of enzyme activity for the "elevated" seven enzymes when compared with the remainder. Reducing agents such as GSH (0.1 mM), ascorbic acid (0.1 mM), and dithiothreitol (0.01 mM), when added to the incubation mixture, significantly reduced the in vitro loss of activity. In vitro incubation was also associated with a significant loss of GSH and DPNH and a 1.8-fold increase in lipid peroxidation products.