Transport of sugars across the cytoplasmic membranes of gram-positive bacteria appears to be regulated by the action of a metabolite-activated, ATP-dependent protein kinase that phosphorylates a seryl residue in the phosphocarrier protein of the phosphotransferase system, HPr. We have developed a quantitative assay for measuring the activity of this enzyme from Streptococcus pyogenes. The product of the in vitro protein kinase-catalyzed reaction was shown to be phosphoseryl-HPr by several independent criteria (rates of hydrolysis in the presence of various agents, detection of serine-phosphate in acid hydrolysates, immunological assay, and electrophoretic migration rates). HPrs isolated from four different gram-positive bacteria (S. pyogenes, Streptococcus faecalis, Staphylococcus aureus, and Bacillus subtilis) were shown to be phosphorylated by the kinase from S. pyogenes. In contrast, Escherichia coli HPr was not a substrate of this enzyme. The soluble kinase released from the particulate fraction of the cells with high salt in the presence of a protease inhibitor was shown to have an approximate molecular weight of 60,000 as estimated by gel filtration. Its activity was dependent on divalent cations, with Mg2+ and Mn2+ being most active. EDTA, Pi, and high concentrations of salt were strongly inhibitory. The enzyme was optimally active at pH 7.0, exhibited high affinity for its substrates, and was dependent on the presence of one of several metabolites. Of these compounds, fructose 1-6-diphosphate was most active, with gluconate 6-phosphate, 2-phosphoglycerate, 2,3-diphosphoglycerate, phosphoenolpyruvate, and pyruvate exhibiting moderate to low stimulatory activities. Other compounds tested, including a variety of sugar phosphates, pyridine nucleotides, and other metabolites were without effect. The ATP-dependent phosphorylation of HPr on the seryl residue was strongly inhibited by phosphoenolpyruvate-dependent phosphorylation of the active histidyl residue of this protein. Treatment of the kinase with diethyl pyrocarbonate strongly inhibited the ATP-dependent phosphorylation activity, although the sulfhydryl reagents N-ethylmaleimide, p-chloromercuribenzoate, and iodoacetate were without effect. These results serve to characterize the HPr (serine) kinase, which apparently regulates the rates of carbohydrate transport in streptococcal cells via the phosphotransferase system. A primary role of this kinase in the control of cellular inducer levels and carbohydrate metabolic rates is proposed.