The effect of the ODC-factor, which was partially purified from ascites fluid of mice bearing Ehrlich ascites hepatoma, on DNA synthesis in the normal mouse liver and spleen was studied, and target cells for the factor in the liver were examined. DNA synthesis in the liver increased about 4-fold over the basal level 39-42 h after the increase of ODC activity induced by injection of the factor into normal mice. This increase of DNA synthesis was inhibited by repeated injection of DAPol. The inhibition was completely reversed by the administration of an appropriate amount of putrescine at about the same time. TK activity also increased in parallel with DNA synthesis. Normal mice with and without treatment with the factor were used to examine which cell population in the liver is the real target for the factor. The livers were dispersed and three cell populations (heavy, medium, and light) were separated by centrifugation. The heavy and light cell populations were characterized as mature hepatocytes and a cell population consisting mainly of immature hepatocytes and non-hepatocytes by analysis of marker enzymes, pyruvate kinase isozymes, L and M2, respectively. The factor stimulated ODC induction, with concomitant increases in TK and DNA poly activities and DNA synthesis, most effectively in the light cell fraction followed in order by the medium and heavy fractions. A nutritional factor (a high protein diet), which is a potent inducer of liver ODC, appeared to act on liver in a different way from the ODC-factor, judging from the results of studies of both whole liver and the fractionated cell system described above. Autoradiography of [3H]thymidine incorporation into liver cells showed that DNA synthesis in mature hepatocytes as well as nonhepatocytes was enhanced by injection of the factor. Stimulation of non-hepatocytes seems to be suggestive evidence that an immunologic response of mice might be developed by the factor. In fact, ODC activity, DNA synthesis, and DNA poly activity (but not TK) in the spleen significantly increased in response to the factor and their increments were suppressed by DAPol, though less sensitively than those in the light cell fraction of the liver.