Propionate inhibited the metabolic flux through the pyruvate dehydrogenase reaction in the perfused rat liver when the perfusate concentration of propionate was below 10 mM and the perfusate pyruvate concentration was held within the physiological range. At higher propionate concentrations (e.g., 20 mM) the inhibition of pyruvate dehydrogenase was alleviated and the activation state of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex was nearly doubled. In livers perfused with a high pyruvate concentration (e.g., 5 mM), propionate coinfusion at all concentrations inhibited the rate of pyruvate decarboxylation. Additional studies were performed in liver mitochondria maintained in State 3 where the ATP/ADP and the NADH/NAD+ ratios were held constant. Low propionate concentrations (e.g., 0.5 mM) inactivated the mitochondrial pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, whereas propionate levels in excess of 1 mM activated the enzyme complex. CoA distribution analyses of the mitochondrial incubations indicated that the presence of either 0.5 or 10 mM propionate caused a substantial accumulation of propionyl-CoA and methylmalonyl-CoA at the expense of free CoASH. Experiments were performed in which the ratios of various acyl-CoA derivatives to CoASH were varied by sequentially increasing the L-carnitine concentrations in the incubation. An inverse relationship between the propionyl-CoA/CoASH and methylmalonyl-CoA/CoASH ratios and the activity of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex was observed. Experiments using freeze-thawed liver mitochondrial membranes indicated that propionate protected the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex from ATP-mediated inactivation by the pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase. It is our contention that the inactivation of pyruvate dehydrogenase complex at low propionate levels may be due to an increase in the mitochondrial acyl-CoA/CoASH ratios, whereas the activation of the enzyme complex demonstrated at high propionate levels is due to the inhibition of the pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase in a manner similar to that caused by pyruvate or dichloroacetic acid.