gamma-Glutamyltranspeptidase (GGT)-positive foci and glutathione-S-transferase, placental (GST-P)-positive lesions occupied 36% and 54% of liver parenchyma, respectively, in Wistar rats 8 weeks after initiation with diethylnitrosamine, followed by selection. The administration of S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAM, 384 mumol/kg/day) caused 77% and 42% falls in the percentage of GGT-positive and GST-P-positive lesions, respectively. There also occurred a 46% decrease in labeling index of GGT-positive foci, in SAM-treated rats. These changes were associated with decrease in liver pyruvate kinase (PK), lactate dehydrogenase and glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase. SAM did not affect these enzymatic activities in normal and uninitiated controls, but it caused a consistent increase in initiated rats. Enolase, fructose-biphosphatase and malic enzyme (ME) activities increased in the liver of initiated rats. SAM did not modify significantly these enzymatic activities, either in control or in initiated rats. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PDH) was 113% higher in the liver of initiated rats than in uninitiated controls. SAM treatment did not significantly affect this enzymatic activity in uninitiated rats, but caused a great decrease in initiated ones. As expected, there occurred a marked rise in GGT activity in the liver of initiated rats, with respect to controls. SAM caused an increase in GGT activity in normal and uninitiated controls, but it caused a 77% fall in GGT activity in initiated rats, coupled with a 380% rise in remodeling of GGT-positive lesions. Histochemical determination of G6PDH and ME activities showed that in the absence of SAM many preneoplastic lesions expressed higher G6PDH and ME activities than surrounding liver. SAM did not affect ME-positive lesions, while it caused a decrease in the number of G6PDH-positive lesions. Immunohistochemical determination of PK activity, isoenzyme L, showed a decrease in GST-P-positive lesions. Many of these lesions were no longer recognizable as lesions expressing a low PK activity, in SAM-treated rats. However, a relatively small number of GST-P-positive lesions expressing a low PK activity were still present in these rats. These data suggest that glucose channelled into triacylglycerol and pyruvate synthesis decreases in rat liver, during the development of preneoplastic foci, while the production of reducing equivalents and pentose phosphates increases, thus favoring DNA synthesis and detoxification reactions. Decrease in DNA synthesis, in SAM-treated rats, is paralleled by a partial reversion of carbohydrate metabolic features to those present in normal liver.