The molecular abnormalities of erythroenzymopathies associated with hereditary hemolytic anemia have been determined using molecular techniques. Pyruvate kinase (PK) deficiency is the most common and well-characterized enzyme deficiency involving the glycolytic pathway and causing hereditary hemolytic anemia. We have identified six distinct missense mutations and a form of splicing mutation in 11 unrelated families with homozygous PK deficiency. Mutations located near the substrate binding site may change the conformation of the active site, resulting in a drastic loss of activity and severe clinical symptoms. Up to now, including these genetic defects, 21 missense, 1 nonsense and 2 splicing mutations, 2 insertions, and 3 deletions have been determined. G6PD deficiency is the most common metabolic disorder, and is associated with chronic and drug- or infection-induced hemolytic anemia. To date, sixty different mutations have now been identified. Except for three kinds of variants with small gene deletions or three nucleotide substitutions, all of those were found to be produced by one or two nucleotide substitutions. Molecular studies disclosed that all the class 1 variants associated with chronic hemolysis have the mutations surrounding either the substrate or the NADP binding site. Among rare enzymopathies, missense mutations have been determined in glucosephosphate isomerase deficiency, aldolase deficiency, triosephosphate isomerase (TPI) deficiency, phosphoglycerate kinase deficiency, and adenylate kinase deficiency. Compound heterozygous cases with missense mutation/nonsense mutation and missense mutation/decreased mRNA have been reported in TPI deficiency and diphosphoglyceromutase deficiency, respectively. In phosphofructokinase (PFK) deficiency, three kinds of 5'-splice junction mutations resulting in abnormally spliced PFK-M mRNA were identified. An exception is a hemolytic anemia due to increased adenosine deaminase activity. The basic abnormality appears to result from overproduction of structurally normal enzyme.