Pyruvate kinase [EC 2.7.1.40] in various tissues of rats was separable into seven kinds of pI-isozymes by isoelectric separation with Ampholine carrier ampholytes; pI 5.4-isozyme, pI 5.6-isozyme, pI 6.2-isozyme (2 kinds), pI 6.6-isozyme, pI 7.4-isozyme, and pI 7.8-isozyme. Some of these pI-isozymes contained bound fructose 1,6-diphosphate (FDP). The bound FDP was completely dissociated when the pI-isozymes were salted out with ammonium sulfate. In the FDP-free form, pyruvate kinase was classified into three types, liver-type (type L) of pI 6.2, muscle-type (type M) of pI 7.4, and spleen-type (type M2) of pI 7.8. The liver-type isoenzyme had two kinds of FDP-binding sites; the pI 5.6-isozyme and pI 5.4-isozyme were obtained when one and two kinds of sites were bound with FDP, respectively. The association and dissociation of FDP at both sites were reversible in the presence and absence of 0.15 M KC1 (high ionic strength). The muscle-type isoenzyme had no FDP-binding site. The spleen-type isoenzyme had two kinds of FDP-binding sites, like the liver-type isoenzyme. When the ionic strength of solutions containing the enzyme and FDP was sufficiently low, one and two kinds of the sites could bind with FDP, converting the enzyme into pI 6.6-isozyme and pI 6.2-isozyme, respectively. FDP bound with one kind of site (the 2nd site) was easily dissociable, but FDP bound with the other kind of site (the 1st site) was not. Provided that the 1st site carried bound FDP, the 2nd site was associable at high ionic strength. The liver-type isoenzyme free of FDP and the spleen-type isoenzyme bound with FDP at both sites had similar pI values of 6.2 and were not separable by isoelectric separation. Some properties of these pI-isozymes were compared. When Rhodamine sarcoma was transplanted in rats, the content of spleen-type isoenzyme in the livers increased. When rats were injected with chromatin prepared from either Rhodamine sarcoma or spleen, the content of spleen-type isoenzyme in the livers again increased. This was not observed on the injection of chromatin prepared from liver, indicating that the factor capable of controlling the gene expression was present in chromatins of sarcoma and spleen but barely or not at all in chromatin of liver.