1. The activities of gluconeogenic and glycolytic enzymes and the concentrations of citrate, ammonia, amino acids, glycogen, glucose 6-phosphate, acetyl-CoA, lactate and pyruvate were measured in kidney cortex of normal, diabetic, cortisone-treated and growth hormone-treated rats. 2. In kidney cortex of diabetic, cortisone-treated and growth hormone-treated rats the activities of glucose 6-phosphatase (EC 3.1.3.9), fructose 1,6-diphosphatase (EC 3.1.3.11) and phosphopyruvate carboxylase (EC 4.1.1.32) were increased. 3. The activities of glutamate dehydrogenase (EC 1.4.1.3), alanine aminotransferase (EC 2.6.1.2), aspartate aminotransferase (EC 2.6.1.10) and pyruvate carboxylase (EC 6.4.1.1) were increased in diabetic and cortisone-treated rats. In growth hormone-treated rats the activity of aspartate aminotransferase was depressed but those of the other three enzymes were unchanged. 4. The activity of hexokinase (EC 2.7.1.1) was not altered in any of these conditions. Phosphofructokinase (EC 2.7.1.11) activity was depressed only in growth hormone-treated rats. Pyruvate kinase (EC 2.7.1.40) activity was depressed in cortisone-treated and growth hormone-treated rats but unchanged in diabetic rats. 5. Amino acids, acetyl-CoA and glucose 6-phosphate contents were increased in rat kidneys in all these three conditions. Ammonia content was increased in diabetic and cortisone-treated rats but was markedly diminished in growth hormone-treated rats. 6. The [lactate]/[pyruvate] ratio was elevated in diabetic and cortisone-treated rats but unchanged in growth hormone-treated rats. Citrate content was increased in the kidney cortex of diabetic and growth hormone-treated rats but was unchanged in cortisone-treated rats. The activity of ATP citrate lyase (EC 4.1.3.8) was depressed in diabetic and growth hormone-treated rats but was increased in cortisone-treated rats. 7. Glycogen content was moderately elevated in growth hormone-treated rats and markedly elevated in diabetic rats, whereas no change in glycogen content was observed in cortisone-treated rats. Glycogen synthetase (EC 2.4.1.11) activity was unchanged in all these three conditions. Phosphorylase (EC 2.4.1.1) activity was not affected in cortisone-treated rats but was depressed in diabetic and growth hormone-treated rats.