Clostridium thermoaceticum ferments xylose, fructose, and glucose with acetate as the only product. In fermentations with mixtures of the sugars, xylose is first fermented, then fructose, and last, glucose. Fructose inhibits the fermentation of glucose, and this inhibition appears to be due to a repression of the synthesis of an enzyme needed for glucose utilization. Addition of metals to the culture medium increases the cell yield drastically from about 7 to 18 g per liter, and Y(glucose) values between 40 and 50 are obtained. According to the postulated pathways of the fermentation of glucose and synthesis of acetate from CO(2) by C. thermoaceticum, 3 mol of ATP are available as energy for growth. Thus a Y(adenosine 5'-triphosphate) of 13 to 16 is obtained. Because the normal Y(ATP) value is 10.5, this could mean that an additional source of ATP is available by an unknown mechanism. The addition of metals also increases the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate-dependent formate dehydrogenase activity, the overall reaction ((14)CO(2) --> acetate), and the incorporation of the methyl group of 5-methyltetrahydrofolate into acetate. These reactions are catalyzed very efficiently by cells harvested in early growth, whereas cells obtained at the end of a fermentation have very low formate dehydrogenase activity and capacity to incorporate CO(2) into acetate. The following enzymes involved in the synthesis of acetate from CO(2) and in the metabolism of pyruvate are present in extracts of C. thermoaceticum: 10-formyltetrahydrofolate synthetase, 5,10-methenyltetrahydrofolate cyclohydrolase, 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase, 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase, phosphate acetyltransferase, and acetate kinase. These enzymes are not or are very little affected by the addition of metals to the growth medium. The amount of corrinoids in cells from early growth is low, whereas it is high in cells harvested late in growth. The opposite is found for the activity of delta-aminolevulinate dehydratase, which is high at the beginning of growth and low at the end.