The control of pyruvate dehydrogenase activity by inactivation and activation was studied in intact mitochondria isolated from rabbit heart. Pyruvate dehydrogenase could be completely inactivated by incubating mitochondria with ATP, oligomycin, and NaF. This loss in dehydrogenase activity was correlated with the incorporation of 32P from [gamma-32P]ATP into mitochondrial protein(s) and with a decrease in the mitochondrial oxidation of pyruvate. ATP may be supplied exogenously, generated from endogenous ADP during oxidative phosphorylation, or formed from exogenous ADP in carbonyl cyanid p-trifluoromethoxyphenylhydrazone-uncoupled mitochondria. With coupled mitochondria the concentration of added ATP required to half-inactivate the dehydrogenase was 0.24 mM. With uncoupled mitochondria the apparent Km was decreased to 60 muM ATP. Inactivation of pyruvate dehydrogenase by exogenous ATP was sensitive to atractyloside, suggesting that pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase acts internally to the atractyloside-sensitive barrier. The divalent cation ionophore, A23187, enhanced the loss of dehydrogenase activity. Pyruvate dehydrogenase activity is regulated additionally by pyruvate, inorganic phosphate, and ADP. Pyruvate, in the presence of rotenone, strongly inhibited inactivation. This suggests that pyruvate facilitates its own oxidation and that increases in pyruvate dehydrogenase activity by substrate may provide a modulating influence on the utilization of pyruvate via the tricarboxylate cycle. Inorganic phosphate protected the dehydrogenase from inactivation by ATP. ADP added to the incubation mixture together with ATP inhibited the inactivation of pyruvate dehydrogenase. This protection may result from a direct action on pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase, as ADP competes with ATP, and an indirect action, in that ADP competes with ATP for the translocase. It is suggested that the intramitochondrial [ATP]:[ADP] ratio effects the kinase activity directly, whereas the cytosolic [ATP]:[ADP] ratio acts indirectly. Mg2+ enhances the rate of reactivation of the inactivated pyruvate dehydrogenase presumably by accelerating the rate of dephosphorylation of the enzyme. Maximal activation is obtained with the addition of 0.5 mM Mg2+..