A detailed model of intermediary metabolism has been constructed which is consistent with all known information on the compartmental structure of metabolism in Tetrahymena, on the enzyme complement of this cell, and on the localization of the enzymes. The model allows computation of the specific activity of every carbon atom of all metabolites and thus of the flux of carbon along the major pathways of metabolism under steady state conditions. To test the model, data were required from cells grown under standard conditions and then suspended in a dilute salt solution and incubated for 1 hour in a mixture of acetate, pyruvate, hexanoate, bicarbonate, and glutamate labeled in a total of 10 positions, but with only one substrate labeled in any given flask. Twenty-seven measurements of label incorporation into CO2, lipids, glycogen, glutamate, and alanine were made, plus measurements of label distribution into fatty acid and glycerol moieties for 4 of the substrates and of oxygen consumption and of glycogenolysis, yielding 33 independent measurements. These, plus about 18 "limit" measurements which also constrain any possible solutions, were in sufficient excess of the 23 independent parameters to permit a stringent assessment of the model. Equations derived directly from the structure of the model and from the known stereochemistry of the reactions were programmed on a PDP-15 computer and values of the Qo2 and of label expected to be incorporated into the various products actually measured were computed for any given set of flux rates. A set of flux rates was found which yielded an excellent fit to the observed data. The ability to achieve a fit to the data for an overdetermined system constitutes strong support for this structural model of intermediary metabolism and the computed flux rates therefore provide a quantitative description of metabolite flow in the intact cell. Despite the redundancy of measurements relative to parameters to be determined, it was not possible to define a unique set of values for the flux through phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase, although the relationship between these fluxes is specified by the model. The analysis allows estimation of the recycling of phosphoenopyruvate through pyruvate kinase under conditions of net glyconeogenesis and an apparently futile exchange of acetyl-CoA between the inner and outer mitochondrial compartments. Carbon flow through the glyoxylate bypass under these conditions is about one-third of that through the Krebs cycle. The analysis also shows a net transport of malate from the peroxisomes to the mitochondria, consistent with the anaplerotic role of the peroxisomal glyoxylate bypass in Tetrahymena.