Acquired enzymatic activity defects of erythrocyte pyruvate kinase, glucose phosphate isomerase and phosphofructokinase have been studied in patients with acute myeloid leukemias, sideroblastic refractory anemias and unclassified acquired dyserythropoiesis. 6 patients with acute myeloid leukemia had a lowered erythrocyte pyruvate kinase activity; in 5 of them the concentration of the "pyruvate kinase"-antigen was parallely decreased, in such a manner that the ratio enzyme activity/immunologic reactivity (i.e. the molecular specific activity) was normal. In 1 patient with acute leukemia, 4 with refractory anemia and 1 with acquired dyserythropoiesis the defect of the pyruvate kinase activity was associated with a normal antigen concentration (and, therefore, the molecular specific activity in whole hemolysate was lowered). The enzyme activity was restored by incubation with SH reagents in two cases and by partial purification as often as it was performed. The electrofocusing pattern of erythrocyte pyruvate kinase was normal in both these types of defects. In two patients with so-called "acquired dyserythropoiesis" an erythrocyte glucose phosphate isomerase deficiency has been detected; in both the cases it was associated with a parallel decrease of the antigen concentration. The residual enzyme had a normal electrofocusing and electrophoretic pattern and a normal heat stability; the enzyme activity could not be restored by any treatment. In 1 patient with erythroleukemia and in 1 other with acquired dyserythropoiesis the erythrocyte phosphofructokinase activity was lowered. The enzyme activity was not restored by cross incubation in isologous plasma or by the SH reagents. In one case immunologic study could be performed, indicating that the enzyme defect was mainly due to the decreased ratio of the muscle type subunit of the erythrocyte phosphofructokinase. The electrofocusing pattern of deficient phosphofructokinases was normal. Finally, we point out the probable existence of several direct mechanisms, genetic and post translational, accounting for the acquired enzyme defects of red blood cells in various blood disorders.