1. The regulation of glycolysis and pyruvate oxidation under varying conditions of ATP and oxygen consumption was studied in isolated perfused rat hearts. Potassium-induced arrest was employed to inhibit the ATP consumption of the heart. 2. Under the experimental conditions, the beating heart used solely glucose as the oxidisable substrate. The glycolytic flux through the aldolase step decreased in pace with the decreasing oxygen consumption during the potassium-induced arrest of the heart. The decrease in glucose oxidation was larger than the inhibition of the oxygen consumption, suggesting that the arrested heart switches to fatty acid oxidation. The time course and percentage changes of the inhibition of pyruvate oxidation and the decrease in the amount of the active form of pyruvate dehydrogenase suggest that the amount of active pyruvate dehydrogenase is the main regulator of pyruvate oxidation in the perfused heart. 3. To test the relative significance of the possible mechanisms regulating covalent interconversions of pyruvate dehydrogenase, the following parameters were measured in response to the potassium-induced cardiac arrest: concentrations of pyruvate, acetyl-CoA, CoA-SH, citrate, alpha-oxoglutarate, ATP, ADP, AMP, creatine, creatine phosphate and inorganic phosphate and the mitochondrial NADH/NAD+ ratio. In cardiac tissue the adenylate system is not a good indicator of the energy state of the mitochondrion, even when the concentrations of AMP and free cytosolic ADP are calculated from the adenylate kinase and creatine kinase equilibria. Only creatine phosphate and inorganic phosphate undergo significant changes, but evidence of the participation of the latter compounds in the regulation of the pyruvate dehydrogenase interconversions is lacking. The potassium-induced arrest of the heart resulted in a decrease in pyruvate, a slight increase in acetyl-CoA, a large increase in the concentration of citrate and an increase in the mitochondrial NADH/NAD+. The results can be interpreted as showing that in the heart, the pyruvate dehydrogenase interconversions are mainly regulated by the pyruvate concentration and the mitochondrial redox state. Concentrations of all the regulators tested shifted to directions which one would expect to result in a decrease in the amount of active pyruvate dehydrogenase, but the changes were quite small. Therefore, the energy-linked regulation of pyruvate dehydrogenase in intact tissue is possibly mediated by the equilibrium relations between the cellular redox state and the phosphorylation potential recently confirmed in cardiac tissue.