Fifteen red cell enzyme activities of growth-retarded patients with and without growth hormone (GH) deficiency were investigated before and after GH administration. The 15 enzymes were Hexokinase, phosphoglucomutase, glucose phosphate, isomerase, phosphofructokinase, fructose diphosphate aldolase, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphae dehydrogenase, triosephosphate isomerase, 2,3-diphosphoglycerate mutase, 3-phosphoglycerate kinase, 3-phosphoglycerate mutase, enolase, pyruvate kinase, glycose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, 6-phosphogluconic dehydrogenase, glutathione reducase. Sixty-six subjects were studied: 30 normal control subjects (group N) and 36 patients (aged 5-23 years) with short stature. Complete endocrine evaluation showed 21 (group I) to have GH deficiency (10 patients with isolated GH deficiency) and 15 (group II) to have normal hypothalamic and pituitary function except for two patients with a moderate hypothyroidism. Both had been receiving thyroid hormone treatment for a long time before our studies. All 36 patients were treated with 2 mg human growth hormone intramuscularly for 7 days. Before GH treatment no significant difference was observed between hematologic data in group I (GH deficiency) and group II (no GH deficiency). After GH therapy there was a significant increase in reticulocyte count in both groups of patients with short stature. The mean pretreatment value in group I was 1.294% +/- 0.084 (SEM); the mean post-treatment value was 2.081% +/- 0.287 (SEM)< P less than 0.005. The mean pretreatment value in group II was 1.0% 0.184 (SEM); the mean post-treatment value was 1.407% +/- 0.193 (SEM), P less than 0.01. In group II (no GH deficiency) mean pretreatment erythrocyte enzyme activities were not significantly different from those activities observed in normal control subjects (group N). However, in patients who lacked GH, the pretreatment activities of five red cell enzymes (glucose phosphate isomerase, triosephosphate isomerase, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, 2,3-diphosphoglycerate mutase, 3-phosphoglycerate kinase) were significantly decreased before GH administration compared with the values in normal control subjects...