The mechanism by which fatty acid addition leads to the inactivation of pyruvate dehydrogenase in intact rat liver mitochondria was investigated. In all cases the fatty acid octanoate was added to mitochondria oxidizing succinate. Addition of fatty acid caused an inactivation of pyruvate dehydrogenase in mitochondria incubated under State 3 conditions (glucose plus hexokinase), in uncoupled, oligomycin-treated mitochondria, and in rotenone-menadione-treated mitochondria, but not in uncoupled mitochondria or in mitochondria incubated under State 4 conditions. A number of metabolic conditions were found in which pyruvate dehydrogenase was inactivated concomitant with an elevation in the ATP/ADP ratio. This is consistent with the inverse relationship between the ATP/ADP ratio and the pyruvate dehydrogenase activity proposed by various laboratories. However, in several other metabolic conditions pyruvate dehydrogenase was inactivated while the ATP/ADP ratio either was unchanged or even decreased. This observation implies that there are likely other regulatory factors involved in the fatty acid-mediated inactivation of pyruvate dehydrogenase. Incubation conditions in State 3 were found in which the ATP/ADP and the acetyl-CoA/CoASH ratios remained constant and the pyruvate dehydrogenase activity was correlated inversely with the NADH/NAD+ ratio. Other State 3 conditions were found in which the ATP/ADP and the NADH/NAD+ ratios remained constant while the pyruvate dehydrogenase activity was correlated inversely with the acetyl-CoA/CoASH ratio. Further evidence supporting these experiments with intact mitochondria was the observation that the pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase activity of a mitochondrial extract was stimulated strongly by acetyl-CoA and was inhibited by NAD+ and CoASH. In contrast to acetyl-CoA, octanoyl-CoA inhibited the kinase activity. These results indicate that the inactivation of pyruvate dehydrogenase by fatty acid in isolated rat liver mitochondria may be mediated through effects of the NADH/NAD+ ratio and the acetyl-CoA/CoASH ratio on the interconversion of the active and inactive forms of the enzyme complex catalyzed by pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase and pyruvate dehydrogenase phosphatase.