The hormonal control of [14C]glucose synthesis from [U-14C-A1dihydroxyacetone was studied in hepatocytes from fed and starved rats. In cells from fed rats, glucagon lowered the concentration of substrate giving half-half-maximal rates of incorporation while it had little or no effect on the maximal rate. Inhibitors of gluconeogenesis from pyruvate had no effect on the ability of the hormone to stimulate the synthesis of [14C]glucose from dihydroxyacetone. The concentrations of glucagon and epinephrine giving half-maximal stimulation from dihydroxacetone were 0.3 to 0.4 mM and 0.3 to 0.5 muM, respectively. The meaximal catecholamine stimulation was much less than the maximal stimulation by glucagon and was mediated largely by the alpha receptor. Insulin had no effect on the basal rate of [14C]clucose synthesis but inhibited the effect of submaximal concentration of glucagon or of any concentration of catecholamine. Glucagon had no effect on the uptake of dihydroxyacetone but suppressed its conversion to lactate and pyruvate. This suppression accounted for most of the increase in glucose synthesis. In cells from gasted rats, where lactate production is greatly reduced and the rate of glucose synthesis is elevated, glucagon did not stimulate gluconeogenesis from dihydroxyacetone. Findings with glycerol as substrate were similar to those with dihyroxyacetone. Ethanol also stimulated glucose production from dihydroxyacetone while reducing proportionately the production of lactate. Ethanol is known to generate reducing equivalents fro clyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase and presumably thereby inhibits carbon flux to lactate at this site. Its effect was additive with that of glucagon. Estimates of the steady state levels of intermediary metabolites and flux rates suggested that glucagon activated conversion of fructose diphosphate to fructose 6-phosphate and suppressed conversion of phosphoenolpyruvate to pyruvate. More direct evidence for an inhibition of pyruvate kinase was the observation that brief exposure of cells to glucagon caused up to 70% inhibition of the enzyme activity in homogenates of these cells. The inhibition was not seen when the enzyme was assayed with 20 muM fructose diphosphate. The effect of glucagon to lower fructose diphosphate levels in intact cells may promote the inhibition of pyruvate kinase. The inhibition of pyruvate kinase may reduce recycling in the pathway of gluconeogenesis from major physiological substrates and probably accounts fromsome but not all the stimulatory effect of glucagon.