Rabbit muscle pyruvate kinase is irreversibly inactivated upon incubation with the adenine nucleotide analogue, 5'-p-fluorosulfonylbenzoyladenosine. A plot of the time dependence of the logarithm of the enzymatic activity at a given time divided by the initial enzymatic activity(logE/Eo) reveals a biphasic rate of inactivation, which is consistent with a rapid reaction to form partially active enzyme having 54% of the original activity, followed by a slower reaction to yield totally inert enzyme. In addition to the pyruvate kinase activity of the enzyme, modification with 5'-p-fluorosulfonylbenzoyladenosine also disrupts its ability to catalyze the decarboxylation of oxaloacetate and the ATP-dependent enolization of pyruvate. In correspondence with the time dependence of inactivation, the rate of incorporation of 5'-p-[14C]fluorosulfonylbenzoyladenosine is also biphasic. Two moles of reagent per mole of enzyme subunit are bound when the enzyme is completely inactive. The pseudo-first-order rate constant for the rapid rate is linearly dependent on reagent concentration, whereas the constant for the slow rate exhibits saturation kinetics, suggesting that the reagent binds reversibly to the second site prior to modification. The adenosine moiety is essential for the effectiveness of 5'-p-fluorosulfonylbenzoyladenosine, since p-fluorosulfonylbenzoic acid does not inactivate pyruvate kinase at a significant rate. Thus, the reaction of 5'-p-fluorosulfonylbenzoyladenosine with pyruvate kinase exhibits several of the characteristics of affinity labeling of the enzyme. Protection against inactivation by 5'-p-fluorosulfonylbenzoyladenosine is provided by the addition to the incubation mixture of phosphoenolpyruvate. Mg-ADP or Mg2+. In contrast, the addition of pyruvate, Mg-ATP, or ADP and ATP alone has no effect on the rate of inactivation. These observations are consistent with the postulate that the 5'-p-fluorosulfonylbenzoyladenosine specifically labels amino acid residues in the binding region of Mg2+ and the phosphoryl group of phosphoenolpyruvate which is transferred during the catalytic reaction. The rate of inactivation increases with increasing pH, and k1 depends on the unprotonated form of an amino acid residue with pK = 8.5. On the basis of the pH dependence of the reaction of pyruvate kinase with 5'-p-fluorosulfonylbenzoyladenosine and the elimination of cysteine residues as possible sites of reaction, it is postulated that lysyl or tyrosyl residues are the most probably candidates for the critical amino acids.