1. The properties of pyruvate kinase and, if present, phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase from the muscles of the sea anemone, scallop, oyster, crab, lobster and frog were investigated. 2. In general, the properties of pyruvate kinase from all muscles were similar, except for those of the enzyme from the oyster (adductor muscle); the pH optima were between 7.1 and 7.4, whereas that for oyster was 8.2; fructose bisphosphate lowered the optimum pH of the oyster enzyme from 8.2 to 7.1, but it had no effect on the enzymes from other muscles. Hill coefficients for the effect of the concentration of phosphoenolpyruvate were close to unity in the absence of added alanine for the enzymes from all muscles except oyster adductor muscle; it was 1.5 for this enzyme. Alanine inhibited the enzyme from all muscles except the frog; this inhibition was relieved by fructose bisphosphate. Low concentrations of alanine were very effective with the enzyme from the oyster (50% inhibition was observed at 0.4mm). Fructose bisphosphate activated the enzyme from all muscles, but extremely low concentrations were effective with the oyster enzyme (0.13mum produced 50% activation). 3. In general, the properties of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase from the sea anemone and oyster muscles are similar: the K(m) values for phosphoenolpyruvate are low (0.10 and 0.13mm); the enzymes require Mn(2+) in addition to Mg(2+) for activity; and ITP inhibits the enzymes and the inhibition is relieved by alanine. These latter compounds had no effect on enzymes from other muscles. 4. It is suggested that changes in concentrations of fructose bisphosphate, alanine and ITP produce a coordinated mechanism of control of the activities of pyruvate kinase and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase in the sea anemone and oyster muscles, which ensures that phosphoenolpyruvate is converted into oxaloacetate and then into succinate in these muscles under anaerobic conditions. 5. It is suggested that in the muscles of the crab, lobster and frog, phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase catalyses the conversion of oxaloacetate into phosphoenolpyruvate. This may be part of a pathway for the oxidation of some amino acids in these muscles.