Angiotensin II, catecholamines, and vasopressin are thought to stimulate hepatic glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis via a cyclic AMP-independent mechanism that requires calcium ion. The present study explores the possibility that angiotensin II and vasopressin control the activity of regulatory enzymes in carbohydrate metabolism through Ca2+-dependent changes in their state of phosphorylation. Intact hepatocytes labeled with [32P]PO43- were stimulated with angiotensin II, glucagon, or vasopressin and 30 to 33 phosphorylated proteins resolved from the cytoplasmic fraction of the cell by electrophoresis in sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide slab gels. Treatment of the cells with angiotensin II or vasopressin increased the phosphorylation of 10 to 12 of these cytosolic proteins without causing measurable changes in cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase activity. Glucagon stimulated the phosphorylation of the same set of 11 to 12 proteins through a marked increase in cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase activity. The molecular weights of three of the protein bands whose phosphorylation was increased by these hormones correspond to the subunit molecular weights of phosphorylase (Mr = 93,000), glycogen synthase (Mr = 85,000), and pyruvate kinase (Mr = 61,000). Two of these phosphoprotein bands were positively identified as phosphorylase and pyruvate kinase by affinity chromatography and immunoprecipitation, respectively. Incubation of hepatocytes in a Ca2+-free medium completely abolished the effects of angiotensin II and vasopressin on protein phosphorylation but did not alter those of glucagon. Treatment of hepatocytes with angiotensin II, glucagon, or vasopressin stimulated phosphorylase activity by 250 to 260%, inhibited glycogen synthase activity by 50%, and inhibited pyruvate kinase activity by 30 to 35% (peptides) to 70% (glucagon). The effects of angiotensin II and vasopressin on the activity of all three enzymes were completely abolished if the cells were incubated in a Ca2+-free medium while those of glucagon were not altered. The results imply that angiotensin II, catecholamines, and vasopressin control hepatic carbohydrate metabolism through a Ca2+-requiring, cyclic AMP-independent pathway that leads to the phosphorylation of important regulatory enzymes.