Rat liver soluble proteins were phosphorylated by endogenous protein kinase with [gamma-32P]ATP. Proteins were separated in dodecyl sulphate slab gels and detected with the aid of autoradiography. The relative role of cAMP-dependent, cAMP-independent and Ca2+-activated protein kinases in the phosphorylation of soluble proteins was investigated. Heat-stable inhibitor of cAMP-dependent protein kinase inhibits nearly completed the phosphorylation of seven proteins, including L-type pyruvate kinase. The phosphorylation of eight proteins is not influenced by protein kinase inhibitor. The phosphorylation of six proteins, including phosphorylase, is partially inhibited by protein kinase inhibitor. These results indicate that phosphoproteins of rat liver can be subdivided into three groups: phosphoproteins that are phosphorylated by (a) cAMP-dependent protein kinase or (b) cAMP-independent protein kinase; (c) phosphoproteins in which both cAMP-dependent and cAMP-independent protein kinase play a role in the phosphorylation. The relative phosphorylation rate of substrates for cAMP-dependent protein kinase is about 15-fold the phosphorylation rate of substrates for cAMP-independent protein kinase. The Km for ATP of cAMP-dependent protein kinase and phosphorylase kinase is 8 microM and 38 microM, respectively. Ca2+ in the micromolare range stimulates the phosphorylation of (a) phosphorylase, (b) a protein with molecular weight of 130 000 and (c) a protein with molecular weight of 15 000. The phosphate incorporation into a protein with molecular weight of 115 000 is inhibited by Ca2+. Phosphorylation of phosphorylase and the 15 000-Mr protein in the presence of 100 microM Ca2+ could be completely inhibited by trifluoperazine. It can be concluded that calmodulin is involved in the phosphorylation of at least two soluble proteins. No evidence for Ca2+-stimulated phosphorylation of subunits of glycolytic or gluconeogenic enzymes, including pyruvate kinase, was found. This indicates that it is unlikely that direct phosphorylation by Ca2+-dependent protein kinases is involved in the stimulation of gluconeogenesis by hormones that act through a cAMP-independent, Ca2+-dependent mechanism.