Adult rat hepatocytes were kept in primary culture for 48 h under different hormonal conditions to induce an enzyme pattern which with respect to carbohydrate metabolism approximated that of periportal and perivenous hepatocytes in vivo. 1. Glucagon-treated cells compared with control cells possessed a lower activity of glucokinase, a 4.5-fold higher activity of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase and unchanged levels of glucose-6-phosphatase, phosphofructokinase, fructose-bisphosphatase and pyruvate kinase; they resembled in a first approximation the periportal cell type and are called for simplicity 'periportal'. Inversely, insulin-treated cells compared with control cells contained a 2.2-fold higher activity of glucokinase, a slightly decreased activity of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase, increased activities of phosphofructokinase and pyruvate kinase and unaltered levels of glucose-6-phosphatase and fructose-bisphosphatase; they resembled perivenous cells and are called simply 'perivenous'. Gluconeogenesis and glycolysis were studied under various substrate and hormone concentrations. 2. Physiological concentrations of glucose (5 mM) and lactate (2 mM) gave about 80% saturation of gluconeogenesis from lactate and less than 15% saturation of glycolysis at a simultaneous 40% inhibition of the glycolytic rate by lactate. 3. Comparison of the two cell types showed that under identical assay conditions (5 mM glucose, 2 mM lactate, 0.5 nM insulin, 0.1 muM dexamethasone) gluconeogenesis was 1.5-fold faster in the 'periportal' cells and glycolysis was 2.4-fold faster in the 'perivenous' cells. 4. Metabolic rates were under short-term hormonal control. Insulin increased glycolysis three fold in both cell types with a half-maximal effect at about 0.4 nM, but did not influence the gluconeogenic rate. Glucagon inhibited glycolysis by 70% with a half-maximal effect at about 0.1 nM. Gluconeogenesis was stimulated by glucagon (half-maximal dose: 0.5 nM) 1.8-fold only in 'periportal' cells containing high phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase activity, not in the 'perivenous' cells with a low level of this enzyme. 5. A comparison of the two cell types showed that with maximally stimulating hormone concentrations gluconeogenesis was threefold faster in 'periportal' cells and glycolysis was eightfold faster in 'perivenous' cells. The results support the view that periportal and perivenous hepatocytes in vivo catalyse gluconeogenesis and glycolysis at inverse rates.