Two double-stranded cDNA recombinant pBR322 plasmid libraries were constructed starting from high carbohydrate diet rat liver poly(A)+ mRNA, either fractionated by denaturing sucrose gradient centrifugation for the cloning of L-type pyruvate kinase cDNA, or nonfractionated for aldolase B. Both libraries were screened with single-stranded cDNA probes reverse transcribed from fasted or high carbohydrate diet rat liver mRNAs. mRNAs from fasted animals were also fractionated by sucrose gradient centrifugation and mRNAs from the fed animals were, in addition, further purified by high performance liquid gel filtration chromatography. Those clones hybridizing with the "positive" probe (from animals fed the high carbohydrate diet) and not with the "negative" one (from fasted animals) were preselected and their plasmid DNA was purified and analyzed by positive hybridization-selection. Thirty of 4500 bacteria colonies transformed by recombinant plasmids were preselected by differential screening for pyruvate kinase, and 8 of 864 colonies for aldolase B. Twenty-two recombinant plasmids for pyruvate kinase and two for aldolase B were shown to contain specific cDNA inserts by positive hybridization-selection. Plasmids DNAs of some pyruvate kinase and aldolase B clones (whose inserts ranged from 700 to 1050 bases in length) were labeled by nick translation and used as probes for Northern blot hybridization. The pyruvate kinase cDNA probes recognized mainly a 3400-base RNA species which was detected in high carbohydrate diet rat liver, but not in fasted rat liver and in tissues which do not synthesize L-type pyruvate kinase. In addition, some pyruvate kinase probes hybridized with minor RNA species of about 2000 bases in length, only observed after carbohydrate diet. For aldolase B, the recombinant plasmid DNA hybridized with a single RNA species of 1750 bases. This RNA, detected in kidney, small intestine and liver, was induced by a high carbohydrate diet and increased with liver development. The rat probe cross-hybridized with human aldolase B messenger RNA.