6-Phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase from rat liver was phosphorylated by cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase and [gamma-32P]ATP. Treatment of the 32P-labeled enzyme with thermolysin removed all of the radioactivity from the enzyme core and produced a single labeled peptide. The phosphopeptide was purified by ion exchange chromatography, gel filtration, and reverse phase high pressure liquid chromatography. The sequence of the 12-amino acid peptide was found to be Val-Leu-Gln-Arg-Arg-Arg-Gly-Ser(P)-Ser-Ile-Pro-Gln. Correlation of the extent of phosphorylation with activity showed that a 50% decrease in the ratio of kinase activity to bisphosphate activity occurred when only 0.25 mol of phosphate was incorporated per mol of enzyme subunit, and maximal changes occurred with 0.7 mol incorporated. The kinetics of cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase-catalyzed phosphorylation of the native bifunctional enzyme was compared with that of other rat liver protein substrates. The Km for 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2, 6-bisphosphatase (10 microM) was less than that for rat liver pyruvate kinase (39 microM), fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase (222 microM), and 6- phosphofructose -1-kinase (230 microM). Comparison of the initial rate of phosphorylation of a number of protein substrates of the cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase revealed that only skeletal muscle phosphorylase kinase was phosphorylated more rapidly than the bifunctional enzyme. Skeletal muscle glycogen synthase, heart regulatory subunit of cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase, and liver pyruvate kinase were phosphorylated at rates nearly equal to that of 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2, 6-bisphosphatase, while phosphorylation of fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase and 6-phosphofructo-1-kinase was barely detectable. Phosphorylation of 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase was not catalyzed by any other protein kinase tested. These results are consistent with a primary role of the cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase in regulation of the enzyme in intact liver.