In a study of metabolic regulation, it is frequently useful to consider the degree to which an enzyme can influence the rate of its pathway. The most productive expression of rate-controlling influence is the fractional change in pathway rate per fractional change in enzyme activity (called control strength or sensitivity coefficient). We have developed a system for considering how a substrate-cycle enzyme's control strength depends on its flux and reaction order and on related features of other enzymes of its pathway. We have applied this system to the gluconeogenic pathway of rat liver and the glycolytic pathway of bovine sperm, where enough fluxes and reaction orders have been published to allow valid estimates of several control strengths. In normal fed animals where gluconeogenesis is slow and unidirectional substrate-to-product and product-to-substrate fluxes are comparable, all substrate-cycle limbs have very high and similar control strengths regardless of their flux rates and positions in the pathway. The activity of a step affects all substrate-cycle control strengths similarly as it affects unidirectional end-to-end fluxes relative to net rate. Control strengths of non-substrate-cycle enzymes are negligible compared to those of substrate cycles. In fasting animals, on the other hand, where unidirectional Pyr----Glc flux is much greater than Glc----Pyr flux, upstream enzymes (near Pyr) have a regulatory advantage over downstream enzymes (near Glc). In this circumstance, control strength of each substrate-cycle enzyme is inversely related to rate limitingness between its substrate and the pathway substrate. Because the Pyr/PEP cycle is significantly rate limiting, the control strength of the Pyr----PEP limb is much greater than that of pyruvate kinase and all downstream enzymes. In the glycolytic pathway of bovine sperm, strong product inhibition of hexokinase detracts greatly from its rate limitingness and control strength, which are very small despite its position at the beginning of the pathway and its large free energy. Because the glucose-transport-hexokinase segment is not rate limiting, phosphofructo 1-kinase has almost as much control strength as it would have as the first enzyme of the pathway, and because the F6P/FDP cycle is only moderately rate limiting, Fru-1,6-P2ase and enzymes further downstream have substantial control strengths. When glycolysis is accelerated by stimulation of phosphofructo 1-kinase, control strength shifts from phosphofructo-1-kinase and all downstream enzymes to the transporthesokinase segment.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)