To define more clearly the interactions between mitochondrial creatine kinase and the adenine nucleotide translocase, the outer membrane of rat heart mitochondria was removed by digitonin, producing an inner membrane-matrix (mitoplast) preparation. This mitoplast fracton was well-coupled and contained a high specific activity of mitochondrial creatine kinase. Outer membrane permeabilization was documented by the loss of adenylate kinase, a soluble intermembrane enzyme, and by direct antibody inhibition of mitochondrial creatine kinase activity. With this preparation, we documented four important aspects of functional coupling. Kinetic studies showed that oxidative phosphorylation decreased the value of the ternary enzyme-substrate complex dissociation constant for MgATP from 140 to 16 microM. Two approaches were used to document the adenine nucleotide translocase specificity for ADP generated by mitochondrial creatine kinase. Exogenous pyruvate kinase (20 IU/ml) could not readily phosphorylate ADP produced by creatine kinase, since added pyruvate kinase did not markedly inhibit creatine + ATP-stimulated respiration. Additionally, when ADP was produced by mitochondrial creatine kinase, the inhibition of the translocase required 2 nmol of atractyloside/mg of mitoplast protein, while only 1 nmol/mg was necessary when exogenous ADP was added. Finally, the mass action ratio of the mitochondrial creatine kinase reaction exceeded the apparent equilibrium constant when ATP was supplied to the creatine kinase reaction by oxidative phosphorylation. Overall, these results are consistent with much data from intact rat heart mitochondria, and suggest that the outer membrane plays a minor role in the compartmentation of adenine nucleotides. Furthermore, since the removal of the outer membrane does not alter the unique coupling between oxidative phosphorylation and mitochondrial creatine kinase, we suggest that this cooperation is the result of protein-protein proximity at the inner membrane surface.