A method involving labeling to isotopic steady state and modeling of the tricarboxylic acid cycle has been used to identify the respiratory substrates in lettuce embryos during the early steps of germination. We have compared the specific radioactivities of aspartate and glutamate and of glutamate C-1 and C-5 after labeling with different substrates. Labeling with [U-14C]acetate and 14CO2 was used to verify the validity of the model for this study; the relative labeling of aspartate and glutamate was that expected from the normal operation of the tricarboxylic acid cycle. After labeling with 14CO2, the label distribution in the glutamate molecule (95% of the label at glutamate C-1) was consistent with an input of carbon via the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase reaction, and the relative specific radioactivities of aspartate and glutamate permitted the quantification of the apparent rate of the fumarase reaction. CO2 and intermediates related to the tricarboxylic acid cycle were labeled with [U-14C]acetate, [1-14C] hexanoate, or [U-14C]palmitic acid. The ratios of specific radioactivities of asparate to glutamate and of glutamate C-1 to C-5 indicated that the fatty acids were degraded to acetyl units, suggesting the operation of beta-oxidation, and that the acety-CoA was incorporated directly into citrate. Short-term labeling with [1-14C]hexanoate showed that citrate and glutamate were labeled earlier than malate and aspartate, showing that this fatty acid was metabolized through the tricarboxylic acid cycle rather than the glyoxylate cycle. This was in agreement with the flux into gluconeogenesis compared to efflux as respiratory CO2. The fraction of labeled substrate incorporated into carbohydrates was only about 5% of that converted to CO2; the carbon flux into gluconeogenesis was determined after labeling with 14CO2 and [1-14C]hexanoate from the specific radioactivity of aspartate C-1 and the amount of label incorporated into the carbohydrate fraction. It was only 7.4% of the efflux of respiratory CO2. The labeling of alanine indicates a low activity of either a malic enzyme or the sequence phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase/pyruvate kinase. After labeling with [U-14C]glucose, the ratios of specific radioactivities indicated that the labeled carbohydrates contributed less than 10% to the flux of acetyl-CoA. The model indicated that the glycolytic flux is partitioned one-third to pyruvate and two-thirds to oxalacetate and is therefore mainly anaplerotic. The possible role of fatty acids as the main source of acetyl-CoA for respiration is discussed.