The exposure of fibrinogen receptors is an early event in agonist-induced platelet activation. Previous measurements of fibrinogen binding or aggregation in platelet-rich plasma or washed platelets have failed to define whether the initial response to epinephrine results solely from a direct effect of this agonist. To address this problem, we have measured fibrinogen receptor exposure on platelets in whole blood by using flow cytometry and a fluorescein isothiocyanate-labeled monoclonal antibody specific for the activated fibrinogen receptor (FITC-PAC1). We also measured platelet-bound fibrinogen with an antifibrinogen monoclonal antibody (FITC-9F9) as well as platelet aggregation in whole blood. In blood anticoagulated with citrate and in the presence of a cyclooxygenase inhibitor, epinephrine (0.1 to 100 mumol/L) caused significant FITC-PAC1 binding (P less than .001) that was maximal at 10 mumol/L epinephrine. The maximal epinephrine response was one third of that observed with 10 mumol/L adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and was eliminated by yohimbine, an alpha 2-adrenergic antagonist. Incubation of the blood with apyrase or phosphoenolpyruvate plus pyruvate kinase to remove extracellular ADP resulted in a 40% to 50% reduction in the epinephrine response. Despite this, FITC-PAC1 binding was still significant at epinephrine greater than or equal to 1 mumol/L (P less than .05). No reduction in epinephrine-induced FITC-PAC1 binding was observed in the presence of ATP alpha S, an ADP receptor antagonist; cinanserin, a serotonin antagonist; or WEB-2086, a platelet activating factor antagonist. Furthermore, addition of the thrombin inhibitors hirudin or leupeptin to citrated blood had no effect on the extent of the epinephrine response. Blood anticoagulated with hirudin also demonstrated an epinephrine response, even in the presence of apyrase. Similar results were obtained when FITC-9F9 was used to detect fibrinogen binding or when aggregation was assessed by a decrease in the number of single platelets. We conclude that epinephrine itself can induce fibrinogen receptor exposure, fibrinogen binding, and aggregation. This primary response is independent of synergistic interaction of epinephrine with traces of ADP, serotonin, platelet activating factor, or thrombin. However, such synergistic interaction with ADP present in whole blood may enhance the responses induced by epinephrine.