Interactions between intramitochondrial ATP-generating, ADP-requiring processes and ATP-requiring, ADP-generating phosphorylation of glucose by mitochondrially bound hexokinase (ATP:D-hexose 6-phosphotransferase, EC 2.7.1.1) have been investigated using well-coupled mitochondria isolated from rat brain. ADP generated by mitochondrially bound hexokinase was more effective at stimulating respiration than was ADP generated by hexokinase dissociated from the mitochondria, and pyruvate kinase was less effective as a scavenger of ADP generated by the mitochondrially bound hexokinase than was the case with ADP generated by the dissociated enzyme. These results indicate that ADP generated by the mitochondrially bound enzyme is at least partially sequestered and directed toward the mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation apparatus. Under the conditions of these experiments, the maximum rate of ATP production by oxidative phosphorylation was approximately 10-fold greater than the maximum rate of ATP generation by the adenylate kinase reaction. Moreover, during periods of active oxidative phosphorylation, adenylate kinase made no detectable contribution to ATP production. Thus, adenylate kinase does not represent a major source of ATP for hexokinase bound to actively phosphorylating brain mitochondria. With adenylate kinase as the sole source of ATP, a steady state was attained in which ATP formation was balanced by utilization in the hexokinase reaction. In contrast, when oxidative phosphorylation was the source of ATP, a steady state rate of Glc phosphorylation was attained, but it was equivalent to only about 40-50% of the rate of ATP production and thus there was a continued net increase in ATP concentration in the system. Rates of Glc phosphorylation with ATP generated by oxidative phosphorylation exceeded those seen with equivalent levels of exogenously added ATP. Moreover, at total ATP concentrations greater than approximately 0.2 mM, hexokinase bound to actively phosphorylating mitochondria was unresponsive to continued slow increases in ATP levels; acute increase in ATP (by addition of exogenous nucleotide) did, however, result in increased hexokinase activity. The relative insensitivity of mitochondrially bound hexokinase to extramitochondrial ATP suggested dependence on an intramitochondrial pool (or pools) of ATP during active oxidative phosphorylation. Two intramitochondrial compartments of ATP were identified based on their selective release by inhibitors of electron transport or oxidative phosphorylation. These compartments were distinguished by their sensitivity to inhibitors and the kinetics with which they were filled with ATP generated by oxidative phosphorylation. Exogenous glycerol kinase competed effectively with mitochondrially bound hexokinase for extramitochondrial ATP, with relatively low levels of glycerol kinase completely inhibiting phosphorylation of Glc.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)