The effects of low concentrations of phosphate (low-P) on soluble protein content, the activities of 12 different enzymes, and the rates of photosynthesis and respiration on the basis of leaf area were investigated in maize (Zea mays L.) leaves 16 to 24 days after planting (DAP). With low-P treatment, a drastic decrease in the rate of photosynthesis to only 6% of the maximum rate in control plants was observed by 24 DAP. Low-P treatment had almost no effect on the rate of respiration until 21 DAP, but then the rate of respiration decreased progressively to about 55% of the maximum rate in control plants. The soluble protein content in low-P plants decreased to 56% of the maximum content in control plants. The changes in the activities of enzymes in low-P plants showed several different patterns. The activities of pyruvate, orthophosphate dikinase, 3-phosphoglycerate kinase, phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PEPC), ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase, fructose 1,6-bisphosphate aldolase, catalase, phosphohexose isomerase, chloroplastic fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase, and ADP-glucose-pyrophosphorylase decreased steadily from 85 to 100% of the maximum activity found in 18- to 21-day-old control plants (V(max)) to 30 to 70% of V(max). The activity of sucrose phosphate synthase remained virtually constant at approximately 85 to 100% of V(max). The activity of UDP-glucose-pyrophosphorylase remained almost constant up to 21 DAP and then decreased to 80% of V(max) by 24 DAP. The activity of cytochrome c oxidase increased slightly up to 21 DAP but then decreased to 50% of V(max) by 24 DAP. As indicated by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of soluble proteins, the subunit of PEPC stained less intensely in 24-d-old low-P plants. The possibility is discussed that during low-P treatment there is selective degradation of PEPC without a concomitant degradation of sucrose phosphate synthase, both of which are known to be localized in the cytoplasmic compartment of mesophyll cells.