Renal clear cell tubules and clear/acidophilic cell tumors were induced in male Sprague-Dawley rats by 7 weeks oral administration (stop model) of N-nitrosomorpholine (NNM) at a concentration of 12 mg/100 ml in the drinking water. Twelve, 23 and 34 weeks after withdrawal of NNM serial cryostat sections of the kidneys were histochemically analyzed for the following parameters: glucose transporter proteins (GLUT1, GLUT2), glycogen content and the activities of glycogen synthase (SYN), glycogen phosphorylase (PHO), glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase), glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PDH), hexokinase (HK), glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), pyruvate kinase (PK), succinate dehydrogenase (SDH), malate dehydrogenase (MDH), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), acid phosphatase (ACP) and gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT). Clear cell (glycogenotic) tubules first appeared at 23 weeks, and clear/acidophilic cell tumors at 34 weeks after withdrawal of the carcinogen. G6Pase, ALP, GGT and GLUT2 were absent in clear cell tubules, clear/acidophilic cell tubules, and clear/acidophilic cell tumors indicating a sequential origin of all these types of lesions from the collecting duct system, in line with previous morphological findings. In comparison to the collecting duct epithelium, glycogenotic tubules demonstrated an increased activity of PHO and reduced activities of glycolytic and mitochondrial enzymes, which were accompanied by a strongly reduced expression of GLUT1. Moderately increased activities of glycolytic and mitochondrial enzymes were observed in the clear cells of clear/acidophilic cell tubules and tumors compared with those in glycogenotic tubules. They had slightly increased activities of the glycolytic enzymes GAPDH and PK compared with normal collecting duct epithelium, while most of them were nearly lacking in GLUT1. Our findings suggest that glycogen storage is not due to an increased uptake of glucose from the blood, but results from a disturbance in intracellular flux of metabolites. The development of clear cell tubules from the normal collecting duct epithelium is accompanied by a markedly decreased expression of GLUT1 along with a reduction in glycolytic and mitochondrial enzymes. This reduction of enzyme activities is replaced by an increase in enzyme activities in clear/acidophilic cell tumors indicating a fundamental shift in carbohydrate metabolism during progression from preneoplastic to neoplastic lesions.