The rat L-type pyruvate kinase gene possesses two promoters located 500 bp apart. The L' promoter is specific to erythroid cells. The L promoter is specific to liver and is regulated by diet and hormones; positively by glucose and insulin and negatively by glucagon via cAMP. The DNA elements involved in this tissue-specific and hormone-regulated gene expression are located within 3.2 kbp of 5' flanking region as previously demonstrated by transgenic mice analysis [Tremp, G. L., Boquet, D., Ripoche, M. A., Cognet, M., Yu-Chun, L., Jami, J., Kahn, A. and Daegelen, D. (1989) J. Biol. Chem. 264, 19,904-19,910]. Moreover, we have observed in these mice that gene expression was dependent on the transgene copy number and independent of the integration site. We present here DNase-I-hypersensitivity analysis of the endogenous rat L-type pyruvate kinase gene and of two transgene constructs in relation to development, tissue differentiation, nutritional and hormonal status. In rats, two groups of proximal sites were detected on the endogenous gene; hypersensitive site (HSS) HSS-1 in adult liver and HSS-A in fetal liver (a major erythropoietic tissue). Both groups are probably related to the transcriptional initiation complexes at either the L or L' promoter. Two other distal groups were detected; HSS-2 at -3 kbp (with respect to the liver-specific cap site) in adult liver and HSS-B around -4 kbp in fetal liver. These sites are thought to correspond to activating sequences; in adult liver, deletion of a fragment encompassing HSS-2 provokes a dramatic reduction of transcription starting at the L promoter of the transgene. In adult liver, HSS-1 appears to be a transcription-associated site, being greatly weakened in fasted rats, while HSS-2 is transcription independent. The pattern of DNase-I hypersensitivity is similar for the rat endogenous gene and for the complete rat transgene; the liver-specific HSS-1 and HSS-2 are present and the intensity of the sites is correlated to the number of integrated copies. Interestingly, HSS-1 is still detectable and its intensity remains proportional to the number of integrated copies in a truncated transgene with HSS-2 deletion, while this transgene is very weakly (but nevertheless tissue-specifically) expressed. These results strongly suggest that each transgene copy possesses a complete set of specific nucleoprotein complexes and that, with or without HSS-2, the DNA is in a potentially active configuration.