The inhibition of glycolysis during ethanol oxidation has been examined in isolated hepatocytes from fasted rats. Glycolytic flux was measured by determining the rate of release of tritium from [6-3H]glucose. During ethanol oxidation, the rate of glycolysis was inhibited 80% in freshly prepared hepatocytes, in which shuttle intermediates are depleted, but was depressed only about 20% in the presence of asparagine, a condition under which activity of the malate/aspartate shuttle was restored to normal levels. The inhibition of glycolysis was also partially released by addition of pyruvate and when alcohol dehydrogenase activity was depressed by 4-methylpyrazole. Titrations with this inhibitor revealed inverse linear relationships between the rates of glycolysis and ethanol oxidation. For any given rate of ethanol oxidation, glycolytic flux was lowest and the [lactate]/[pyruvate] ratio highest in the presence of aminooxyacetate, an inhibitor of the malate/aspartate shuttle, whereas flux was highest and the ratio lowest in the presence of asparagine. During these titrations with 4-methylpyrazole the inhibition of ethanol oxidation and concomitant restoration of glycolysis were accompanied by a decline in the [lactate]/[pyruvate] ratio, a substantial fall in the rate of reducing-equivalent transfer from cytoplasm to mitochondria and an increase in lactate accumulation. These findings imply that the reducing equivalents generated during ethanol oxidation compete with those arising in glycolysis for transfer to the mitochondria. This competition leads to an inhibition of aerobic glycolysis, and at the same time contributes to a rise in cytoplasmic NADH and fall in NAD+ that results in depression of anaerobic glycolysis. Allosteric inhibition of 6-phosphofructo-1-kinase due to a decrease in the concentration of fructose 2,6-bisphosphate did not appear to play a primary role in the inhibition of glycolysis by ethanol. Ethanol oxidation had no effect on glucose phosphorylation as measured with [2-3H]glucose, but induced a substantial increase in cycling between glucose and glucose 6-phosphate.