Recent evidence from this laboratory indicates that at least two isoenzymic forms of pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase (PDK1 and PDK2) may be involved in the regulation of enzymatic activity of mammalian pyruvate dehydrogenase complex by phosphorylation (Popov, K.M., Kedishvili, N.Y., Zhao, Y., Gudi, R., and Harris, R.A. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 269, 29720-29724). The present study was undertaken to further explore the diversity of the pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase gene family. Here we report the deduced amino acid sequences of three isoenzymic forms of PDK found in humans. In terms of their primary structures, two isoenzymes identified in humans correspond to rat PDK1 and PDK2, whereas a third gene (PDK3) encodes for a new isoenzyme that shares 68% and 67% of amino acid identities with PDK1 and PDK2, respectively. PDK3 cDNA expressed in Eschierichia coli directs the synthesis of a polypeptide with a molecular mass of approximately 45,000 Da that possesses catalytic activity toward kinase-depleted pyruvate dehydrogenase. PDK3 appears to have the highest specific activity among the three isoenzymes tested as recombinant proteins. Tissue distribution of all three isoenzymes of human PDK was characterized by Northern blot analysis. The highest amount of PDK2 mRNA was found in heart and skeletal muscle, the lowest amount in placenta and lung. Brain, kidney, pancreas, and liver expressed an intermediate amount of PDK2 (brain > kidney = pancreas > liver). The tissue distribution of PDK1 mRNA differs markedly from PDK2. The message for PDK1 was expressed predominantly in heart with only modest levels of expression in other tissues (skeletal muscle > liver > pancreas > brain > placenta = lung > kidney). In contrast to PDk1 and PDK2, which are expressed in all tissues tested, the message for PDK3 was found almost exclusively in heart and skeletal muscle, indicating that PDK3 may serve specialized functions characteristic of muscle tissues. In all tissues tested thus far, the level of expression of PDK2 mRNA was essentially higher than that of PDK1 and PDK3, consistent with the idea that PDK2 is a major isoenzyme responsible for regulation of pyruvate dehydrogenase in human tissues.