The dihydrolipoyl acetyltransferase (E2) component of the mammalian pyruvate dehydrogenase complex forms a 60-subunit core in which E2's inner domain forms a dodecahedron shaped structure surrounded by its globular outer domains that are connected to each other and the inner domain by 2-3-kDa mobile hinge regions. Two of the outer domains are approximately 10 kDa lipoyl domains, an NH2-terminal one, E2L1, and, after the first hinge region a second one, E2L2. The pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase binds tightly to the lipoyl domain region of the oligomeric E2 core and phosphorylates and inactivates the pyruvate dehydrogenase (E1) component. We wished to determine whether lipoyl domain constructs prepared by recombinant techniques from a cDNA for human E2 could bind the bovine E1 kinase and, that being the case, to pursue which lipoyl domain the kinase binds. We also wished to gain insights into how a molecule of kinase tightly bound to the E2 core can rapidly phosphorylate 20-30 molecules of the pyruvate dehydrogenase (E1) component which are also bound to an outer domain of the E2 core. We prepared recombinant constructs consisting of the entire lipoyl domain region or the individual lipoyl domains with or without the intervening hinge region. Constructs were made and used both as free lipoyl domains and fused to glutathione S-transferase (GST). Using GSH-Sepharose to selectively bind GST constructs, tightly bound kinase was shown to rapidly transfer in a highly preferential way from intact E2 core to GST constructs containing the E2L2 domain rather than to ones containing only the E2L1 domain. GST-E2L2-kinase complexes could be eluted from GSH-Sepharose with glutathione. Delipoylation of E2L2 by treatment with lipoamidase eliminated kinase binding supporting a direct role of the lipoyl prosthetic group in this association. Transfer to and selective binding of the kinase by E2L2 but not E2L1 was also demonstrated with free constructs using a sucrose gradient procedure to separate the large E2 core from the various lipoyl domain constructs. E2L2 but not E2L1 increased the activity of resolved kinase by up to 43%. We conclude that the kinase selectively binds to the inner lipoyl domain of E2 subunits and that this association involves its lipoyl prosthetic group. We further suggest that transfer of tightly bound kinase between E2L2 domains occurs by a direct interchange mechanism without formation of free kinase (model presented).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)