The current study was undertaken to investigate energy metabolism during hypoxia in the cold in livers from euthermic and hibernating Columbian ground squirrels. We hypothesized that the hibernating Columbian ground squirrel would be able to maintain liver energetics for a considerably longer time than euthermic animals. Particular reference was made to the function of glycolysis, which is the only mechanism for energy production under hypothermic ischemia. The transition from aerobic to anaerobic metabolism was apparent in both euthermic and hibernating animals as lactate levels rose within 1-3 h; total lactate accumulation was 2.5 micromol/g in both groups. In euthermic squirrels, liver ATP and ADP decreased considerably over the first 3-h storage; values dropped by 55% and 34%, respectively. Conversely, as the drain on high energy phosphate pools progressed, there was an increase in low energy adenylate, AMP. Between 10 and 24 h of storage, increases in AMP accounted for approximately 25-30% of total ATP + ADP decrease. The remainder of the drop in adenylates was accounted for by considerable decreases in total adenylate (TA) contents; by 24 h TA contents had decreased by 2.0 micromol/g. Livers from hibernating squirrels exhibited similar patterns of adenylate change and were not significantly higher than their euthermic counterparts. With respect to regulatory control of glycolysis, livers from euthermic squirrels exhibited no regulatory control at phosphofructokinase (PFK) or pyruvate kinase (PK). Livers from hibernating animals, however, showed an activation at PFK by 10 h of cold storage; levels of hexose phosphates, glucose-6-phosphate + fructose 6-phosphate (G6P + F6P), dropped and fructose 1, 6-biphosphate (F1,6P2), increased. Changes in metabolite levels (phosphoenolpyruvate and pyruvate) associated with another key suspect regulatory enzyme, PK, indicated no role in regulatory control of glycolysis during the 24-h period. The apparent increase in PFK responsiveness to declining energy stores may be a futile activation since there was no accompanying increase in anaerobic end product, lactate, and no maintenance of energetics.