The aim of this review was to re-assess whether the changes in energy balance that accompany pregnancy predispose parous women to obesity. A number of cross-sectional studies have sought to answer this question by examining the relationship between parity and maternal body weight. However, these studies were unable to control for the large number of sociobehavioural confounders that might be responsible for the apparent effect of parity on body weight. Longitudinal studies that examine changes in maternal body weight before and after regnancy avoid these problems by using each mother as her own control. Nevertheless, these studies have to overcome three methodological constraints: They must obtain an accurate measure of prepregnant body weight, they must give each mother sufficient time to lose any weight retained following delivery, and they must take into account the effect of ageing on maternal weight gain during pregnancy and the follow-up period. More than 90% of the studies reviewed found body weight to be greater after pregnancy than it was before (by 0.2-10.6 kg). and previous researchers who have examined the evidence for pregnancy-related weight gains suggest that body weight increases by an average of 04-4.8 kg following pregnancy. However, only three of the 71 longitudinal studies examined in the present review complied with the three methodological criteria. These studies concluded that mothers gain, on average, 0.9-3.3 kg more weight following pregnancy than nonpregnant controls, and that mean body weight remained 0.4-3.0 kg higher, even after controlling for a number of sociobehavioural confounders. This apparently modest increase in mean maternal body weight for women having one or two children conceals the fact that some mothers experience a substantial increase in body weight and become obese following pregnancy. It remains unclear whether these increases are simply the result of changes in energy metabolism during pregnancy and lactation, or whether they are influenced by inherent changes in lifestyle that accompany pregnancy and motherhood. Understanding the relative importance of these alternatives might help to explain the aetiology of maternal obesity."Clover was a stout motherly mare approaching middle life, who had never quite got her figure back after her fourth foal"George Well (1945) Animal Farm. London: Secker and Warburg.