The intracellular mechanisms of regulation of energy fluxes and respiration in contracting heart cells were studied. For this, we investigated the workload dependencies of the rate of oxygen consumption and metabolic parameters in Langendorff-perfused isolated rat hearts.(31)P NMR spectroscopy was used to study the metabolic changes during transition from perfusion with glucose to that with pyruvate with and without active creatine kinase system. The experimental results showed that transition from perfusion with glucose to that with pyruvate increased the phosphocreatine content and stability of its level at increased workloads. Inhibition of creatine kinase reaction by 15-min infusion of iodoacetamide decreased the maximal developed tension and respiration rates by a factor of two.(31)P NMR data were analyzed by a mathematical model of compartmentalized energy transfer, which is independent from the restrictions of the classical concept of creatine kinase equilibrium. The analysis of experimental data by this model shows that metabolic stability-constant levels of phosphocreatine, ATP and inorganic phosphate-at increased energy fluxes is an inherent property of the compartmentalized system. This explains the observed substrate specificity by changes in mitochondrial membrane potential. The decreased maximal respiration rate and maximal work output of the heart with inhibited creatine kinase is well explained by the rise in myoplasmic ADP concentration. This activates the adenylate kinase reaction in the myofibrillar space and in the mitochondria to fulfil the energy transfer and signal transmission functions, usually performed by creatine kinase. The activity of this system, however, is not sufficient to maintain high enough energy fluxes. Therefore, there is a kinetic explanation for the decreased maximal respiration rate of the heart with inhibited creatine kinase: i.e. a kinetically induced switch from an efficient energy transfer pathway (PCr-CK system) to a non-efficient one (myokinase pathway) within the energy transfer network of the cell under conditions of low apparent affinity of mitochondria to ADP in vivo. This may result in a significant decrease in the thermodynamic affinity of compartmentalized ATPase systems and finally in heart failure.