In contrast to performing assays on a substrate using immobilization techniques, wet analysis in nanoliter-sized wells allows quantitative monitoring of enzyme-based reactions by measuring luminescence with time. However, a suitable dispensing method is required to accurately deposit stabilized enzyme solutions into nanoliter wells in such a manner that the enzyme activities are preserved prior to and during measurements. Furthermore, an efficient method is required to add sample liquid to these wells in such a manner that evaporation of assay liquid is completely prevented during sample introduction and monitoring. A powerful methodology is presented in this paper allowing quantitative analysis of enzyme-based reactions in identical nanoliter volumes on-chip. In a first step, picoliter amounts of protein solutions are deposited as uniform dry dots into wells using our reported electrospraying technique (Moerman, R.; Frank, J.; Marijnissen, J. C. M.; Schalkhammer, T. G. M.; van Dedem, G. W. K. Anal. Chem. 2001, 73, 2183-2189.). The silicon chips are then stored at temperatures as low as -80 degrees C. At the time of analysis, a sample solution is slid into the wells using a coverslip. With the edge of the coverslip, sample solution is pushed across the wells at a speed of 1.5-2.5 cm/s to prevent carryover of reagents to neighboring wells. Evaporation of assay liquid from the wells is prevented because the coverslip seals the wells and "bonds" to the chip by adhesion forces. Electrospraying appears to be an excellent method to deposit enzyme solutions containing up to 20% (w/v) of trehalose without being hampered by clogging of the capillary or splashing of droplets. After being sprayed on-chip (silicon nitride), the enzymes pyruvate kinase and lactate dehydrogenase remained stable for a period of 1.5-2 months at a storage temperature of -20 degrees C. The coverslip method completely prevented evaporation for minutes up to hours allowing monitoring of enzyme-based reactions in arrays of nanoliter wells.