Estrogen is known to affect the regulation of all six of the established anterior pituitary gland (AP) hormones, but little is known of the specifics of its regulation of the AP hormones, their isoforms, and nonhormonal AP proteins. We used difference gel electrophoresis in conjunction with matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry and peptide mass fingerprinting to quantify the effects of estrogen on the AP-soluble protein fraction in rats. Two-month-old rats were ovariectomized and used at 6 months of age. They were injected subcutaneously with sesame oil vehicle or 50 mug estradiol valerate in vehicle and studied 48 hrs later, approximately 3 hrs before the time of the anticipated onset of the estrogen-induced surges of gonadotropins in blood. The APs were pooled, and the soluble protein fraction was examined in replicate analyses. After DeCyder software analysis, we identified 26 protein spots that had a 1.5-fold or greater average increase in the experimental group relative to the controls. Nineteen showed a 1.5-fold or greater decrease. Estrogen increased levels of the more acidic isoforms of growth hormone and prolactin and of proteins involved in protein synthesis, folding, and secretion (e.g., eukaryotic translation elongation factor 2, ERp57, ERp29, Hsc70-ps1, calreticulin, coatomer delta subunit, and secretogranin II) and of some metabolic enzymes (e.g., arginosuccinate synthetase, enolase 1, creatine kinase B, phosphoglycerate mutase, malate dehydrogenase, pyruvate kinase, and aldolase A). The majority of the downregulated proteins were involved in RNA or DNA interactions (e.g., five heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins, DEAD-box proteins 17 and 48, ssDNA binding protein PUR-alpha, PTB-associated splicing factor, and Pigpen protein), but isovaleryl coenzyme A dehydrogenase, mitochondrial aldehyde dehydrogenase, stathmin 1, vinculin, radixin, and secretogranin III were also reduced. Our results indicate that estrogen acts in vivo within 48 hrs to modulate levels of a significant number of AP proteins.