The present study discusses the role of structural organization of cardiac cells in determining the mechanisms of regulation of oxidative phosphorylation and interaction between mitochondria and ATPases. In permeabilized adult cardiomyocytes, the apparent K(m) (Michaelis-Menten constant) for ADP in the regulation of respiration is far higher than in mitochondria isolated from the myocardium. Respiration of mitochondria in permeabilized cardiomyocytes is effectively activated by endogenous ADP produced by ATPases from exogenous ATP, and the activation of respiration is associated with a decrease in the apparent K(m) for ATP in the regulation of ATPase activity compared with this parameter in the absence of oxidative phosphorylation. It has also been shown that a large fraction of the endogenous ADP stimulating respiration remains inaccessible for the exogenous ADP trapping system, consisting of pyruvate kinase and phosphoenolpyruvate, unless the mitochondrial structures are modified by controlled proteolysis. These data point to the endogenous cycling of adenine nucleotides between mitochondria and ATPases. Accordingly, the current hypothesis is that in cardiac cells, mitochondria and ATPases are compartmentalized into functional complexes (ie, intracellular energetic units [ICEUs]), which appear to represent a basic pattern of organization of energy metabolism in these cells. Within the ICEUs, the mitochondria and ATPases interact via different routes: creatine kinase-mediated phosphoryltransfer; adenylate kinase-mediated phosphoryltransfer; and direct ATP and ADP channelling. The function of ICEUs changes not only after selective proteolysis, but also during contraction of cardiomyocytes caused by an increase in cytosolic Ca(2+) concentration up to micromolar levels. In these conditions, the apparent K(m) for exogenous ADP and ATP in the regulation of respiration markedly decreases, and more ADP becomes available for the exogenous pyruvate kinase-phosphoenolpyruvate system, which indicates altered barrier functions of the ICEUs. Thus, structural changes transmitted from the contractile apparatus to mitochondria clearly participate in the regulation of mitochondrial function due to alterations in localized restriction of the diffusion of adenine nucleotides. The importance of strict structural organization in cardiac cells emerged drastically from experiments in which the regulation of mitochondrial respiration was assessed in a novel cardiac cell line, that is, beating and nonbeating HL-1 cells. In these cells, the mitochondrial arrangement is irregular and dynamic, whereas the sarcomeric structures are either absent (in nonbeating HL-1 cells) or only rarely present (in beating HL-1 cells). In parallel, the apparent K(m) for exogenous ADP in the regulation of respiration was much lower than that in permeabilized primary cardiomyocytes, and trypsin treatment exerted no impact on the low K(m) value for ADP, in contrast to adult cardiomyocytes where it caused a marked decrease in this parameter. The HL-1 cells were also characterized by the absence of direct exchange of adenine nucleotides. The results further support the concept that the ICEUs in adult cardiomyocytes are products of complex structural organization developed to create the most optimal conditions for effective energy transfer and feedback between mitochondria and ATPases.