Fatty acid reesterification in adipose tissue is dependent on the generation of glycerol 3-phosphate, and, at least in rodent adipose tissue, this appears to occur primarily through glyceroneogenesis. A key enzyme in this process is pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4 (PDK4). PDK4 is induced in white adipose tissue by thiazolidinediones (TZDs) and the inhibition or knockdown of PDK4 inhibits TZD-induced increases in glyceroneogenesis. Since TZDs have many unwanted side effects, we were interested in identifying alternative mechanisms that could regulate PDK4 mRNA expression in white adipose tissue. In this regard we hypothesized that exercise, fasting, and epinephrine would increase PDK4 mRNA levels in rat epididymal adipose tissue. We further postulated that the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and 5'-AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) signaling pathways would control PDK4 mRNA expression in cultured adipose tissue. Exercise, fasting, and in or ex vivo epinephrine treatment increased PDK4 mRNA levels. These perturbations did not increase the expression of PDK1, -2, or -3. Pyruvate dehydrogenase phosphorylation was increased after an overnight fast and 4 h after the cessation of exercise. In cultured adipose tissue, epinephrine increased p38 and AMPK signaling; however, the direct activation of AMPK by AICAR or metformin led to reductions in PDK4 mRNA levels. The p38 inhibitor SB202190 reduced epinephrine-mediated increases in p38 MAPK activation without altering hormone-sensitive lipase or AMPK phosphorylation or attenuating epinephrine-induced increases in lipolysis. Reductions in p38 MAPK signaling were associated with decreases in PDK4 mRNA expression. The inhibition of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPARgamma) also attenuated the induction of PDK4. Our results are the very first to demonstrate an epinephrine-mediated regulation of PDK4 mRNA levels in white adipose tissue and suggest that p38 MAPK and PPARgamma could be involved in this pathway.