Cancer cells undergo an increased steady-state ROS condition compared to normal cells. Among the major metabolic differences between cancer cells and normal cells is the dependence of cancer cells on glycolysis as a major source of energy even in the presence of oxygen (Warburg effect). In Warburg effect, glucose is catabolized to lactate that is extruded through monocarboxylate transporters to the microenvironment of cancer cells, while in normal cells, glucose is metabolized into pyruvate that is not extruded. Pyruvate is a potent antioxidant, while lactate has no antioxidant effect. Pyruvate in normal cells may be further metabolized to acetyl CoA and then through Krebs cycle with production of antioxidant intermediates e.g. citrate, malate and oxaloacetate together with the reducing equivalents (NADH.H+). Through activity of mitochondrial transhydrogenase, NADH.H+ replenishes NADPH.H+, coenzyme of glutathione reductase which replenishes reduced form of glutathione (potent antioxidant). This enhances antioxidant capacities of normal cells, while cancer cells exhibiting Warburg effect may be deprived of all that antioxidant capabilities due to loss of extruded lactate (substrate for Krebs cycle). Although intrinsic oxidative stress in cancer cells is high, it may be prevented from reaching progressively increasing levels that are cytotoxic to cancer cells. This may be due to some antioxidant effects exerted by hexokinase II (HK II) and NADPH.H+ produced through HMP shunt. Glycolytic phenotype in cancer cells maintains a high non-toxic oxidative stress in cancer cells and may be responsible for their malignant behavior. Through HK II, glycolysis fuels the energetic arm of malignancy, the mitotic arm of malignancy (DNA synthesis through HMP shunt pathway) and the metastatic arm of malignancy (hyaluronan synthesis through uronic acid pathway) in addition to the role of phosphohexose isomerase (autocrine motility factor). All those critical three arms start with the substrate G6P that is a direct product of HK II. 3-bromopyruvate (3BP, inhibitor of HK II) may prove as a promising anticancer and antimetastatic agent based on antagonizing the Warburg effect and disturbing the malignant behavior in cancer cells.