Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is currently considered a worldwide epidemic and finding effective therapeutic strategies against this disease is highly important. A deoxynojirimycin-polysaccharide mixture (DPM) has previously been shown to exert hypoglycemic effects on alloxan- or streptozotocin (STZ)-induced diabetic mice. The purpose of the present study was to evaluate the therapeutic effects and underlying mechanism(s) of DPM on T2DM induced by high fat diet following low-dose STZ treatment in mice. After daily oral treatment of diabetic mice with DPM (150 mg/kg b.w.) for 90 d, significant decline in blood glucose, pyruvate, triglyceride (TG), aspartate transaminase (AST), alanine transaminase (ALT), creatinine (Cr), lipid peroxide (LPO) and malondialdehyde (MDA) levels as well as evident increases in high density lipoprotein (HDL-c) and hepatic glycogen concentrations were observed. In the first stage, in which DPM was administered for 60 d, blood insulin levels did not undergo significant change but a significant decrease in the HOMA-IR index was detected. By contrast, the HOMA-IR index increased significantly in T2MD controls. In the second stage, in which DPM treatment was continued for another 30 d, insulin levels significantly increased in DPM-treated mice in comparison with T2DM controls. These results indicate that insulin resistance in the pre-diabetic period and the dysfunction of pancreatic beta-cells are ameliorated by DPM treatment. DPM also down-regulated protein levels of insulin receptor (IR) and gluconeogenic enzymes (pyruvate carboxylase, fructose-1, 6-bisphosphatase, phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase and glucose-6-phosphatase) in peripheral tissues (liver and/or muscle), but enhanced the expressions of insulin in pancreas, lipoprotein lipase (LPL) and glycolysis enzymes (glucokinase, phosphofructokinase, private kinase and pyruvate decarboxylase E1) in the liver. Furthermore, deoxynojirimycin (DNJ) and polysaccharide (P) were found to increase proliferation of hepatic LO-2 cells and scavenging of radicals in vitro. These results support the results of our biochemical analyses and underscore possible mechanisms underlying the protective effects of DPM on STZ-induced damage to the pancreas and the liver. Taken together, our findings suggest that DPM may be developed as an antihyperglycemic agent for the treatment of diabetes mellitus.