n-3 highly unsaturated fatty acids (n-3 HUFAs) have been shown to suppress lipid accumulation and improve protein utilization in grass carp; however, little is known about the underlying molecular mechanism. Hence, we analyzed the hepatopancreas transcriptome of grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idellus) fed either lard oil (LO) or fish oil (FO) diets. RNA-seq data showed that 125 genes were significantly up-regulated and 107 were significantly down-regulated in the FO group. Among them, 17 lipid metabolism related genes, 12 carbohydrate metabolism related genes, and 34 protein metabolism related genes were selected. Lipid metabolism related genes, such as very long-chain acyl-CoA synthetase (ACSVL),carnitine O-palmitoyltransferase 1 (CPT1) and carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase (CACT), were up-regulated in the FO group. But the genes of diacylglycerol O-acyltransferase 2 (DGAT2) and stearoyl-CoA desaturase (SCD) were down-regulated. Down-regulation of glycolysis related genes, such as 6-phosphofructokinase (PFK), phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK) and pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase (PDK), added with up-regulation of gluconeogenesis related genes, such as phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) and glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase), suggests lower utilization of carbohydrate of the FO group. Besides, dietary FO also influenced the protein metabolism related genes, such as up-regulation of genes involved in digestion of dietary protein, mRNA transcription, protein translation and amino acid utilization, down-regulation of genes involved in mRNA degradation and ubiquitination of protein. Interestingly, the up-regulation of mitochondrial uncoupling protein 2 (UCP2) and down-regulation of oxidative phosphorylation related genes (cytochrome c oxidase subunit 4 isoform 2 [COX4I2], HIG1 domain family member 1A [HIGD1A] and cytochrome-b5 reductase [CYB5R]) suggest that energy metabolism may be also influenced by dietary fatty acid composition. These findings presented here provide a comprehensive understanding of the molecular mechanisms governing the effects of fish oil in grass carp.