The right heart is functionally and structurally different from the left heart; however, potential differences in Akt signaling and the expression of metabolic genes between the right heart and left heart in different rodents are still unknown. Using Western blotting and real time quantification polymerase chain reaction, we measured the levels of total Akt, phosphorylated Akt and its downstream targets as well as metabolism genes including glucose transporter 1, glucose transporter 4 (GLUT4), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor delta, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1alpha (PGC-1alpha), and pyruvate dehydrogenase lipoamide kinase isozyme 4. We found that phosphorylated Akt and proline-rich Akt substrate 40 levels were significantly increased in the RV compared with the LV in rats but only had an increased trend in mice. Correspondingly, GLUT4 was significantly increased in the RV compared with the LV both in mice and rats. PGC-1alpha was significantly increased in the RV compared with the LV in mice but only had an increased trend in rats. Moreover, Akt signaling activity and metabolism genes' expression in the IVS were similar to the RV in mice but to the LV in rats. There were some differences in the activity of Akt signaling and in the levels of metabolism genes among the right ventricle, interventricular septum and left ventricle. Also, the diversity of activity of Akt and metabolism genes between the right ventricle and left ventricle are different between rats and mice. In conclusion, the activity of Akt signaling and the levels of metabolism genes are different among the right ventricle, interventricular septum and left ventricle providing some potential clues for exploring the roles of Akt signaling and cardiac metabolisms in different parts of the heart. Additionally, the differences in Akt activity and metabolism genes' levels between the right and left ventricles are different between mice and rats, to which we should pay attention when using different animal model in heart study.